Translated by-**Dr Nyunt Lwin (SURGEON)** \*  PAGE   \\* MERGEFORMAT 3
# ***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 












NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 



**THE WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO** 

**NIBBĀNA** 




# **VOLUME IV** 


***LAKKHANĀDI CATUKKA*** 



**BY** 


# **PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 
** 
\***






**The reason to discern the Character-Essence-Perception-Proximate Cause** 

**(*Lakkhaṇa-Rasa-Paccupaṭṭhāna-Padaṭṭhāna*) of the Ultimates (= *ParamAṭṭha*)** 


## **Application of Mindfulness on the Process of Cognition and Volition** 
**(*Dhammānupassanā saṭtipaṭṭhāna*)** 
**

## **Page 209 To 226** 


**TRANSLATED BY** 


## **Dr Nyunt Lwin (SURGEON)** 
** 

**Computer typing by  \_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_ Ma San San Lwin  Ma Moe Moe Lwin Ma Wai Wai Hlaing Ma Toe Toe Lwin** 





**EDITED BY** 
**


**Venerable *Ashin Sajjana* (*dvipiṭakadhara*)** 


































# **First Edition** 

## Copyright (c) 2007 **Dr Nyunt Lwin (SURGEON)** 


This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

























































**PAGE-209** 
**

### **The Chapter of Speech on Aggregate of Feeling** 
#### **(*Vedanakkhandha  katha*)** 
** 
**

**

**


**1. Bodily Agreeable Feeling**  
### **(Sukha vedana)** 
1. *Itthaphotthabbanubhavana  lakkhanam  **sukham***, 
1. *Sampayuttanam  upabruhana  rasam*,  3. *Kayika  assada  paccupatthanam*, 

 4. *Kayindriya   padatthanam*. 



(Visuddhi-2-91)  

1. The nature of taking up the sense of desirable tactile object  ------------------ 	Character, 
1. The nature which promotes accumulation of associated phenomena -- (Function) Essence, 
1. The pleasant nature arises in the Body  	--------------------------------------- 	Perception, 
1. Faculty of Body = Body transparent element ---------------------------- 	Proximate cause. 


#### ***Kusalavipakena  kayavinnanena  sampayuttam  sukham. (Visuddhi-2-91)***  


`  `It is the Bodily agreeable feeling which arises in association with Wholesome resultant Consciousness of the Body (= *Kusalavipaka kayavinnana*) at the time of taking up of the Senses of Desirable tactile object and Moderately desirable tactile object. 



(= *Itthaphotthabbarammana,  Itthamajjhatta photthabbarammana*). In that Pleasure associated Body-consciousness (= *Sukha sahagata kaya vinnana)* there are (8) types of   Mentalities, Consciousness and associated Mental concomitants. Among  these, select the Bodily agreeable feeling (= *Sukha vedana*) and, discern it. 



**Character-----**The natural Character of the Ultimate phenomena are the separate natures which are not shared with other various phenomena. **Taking up and feeling the Senseobject (= *Anubhavana*)**; is present in every occurence (= *Sadharana lakkhana*) of all kinds of Feelings. (= *Vedana)*. So, to mention that taking up of the Desirable tactile object is the separate natural Character owned by the Bodily agreeable feeling, the Commentary teacher stated as:-“*Itthaphotthabbanubhavana lakkhanam sukham”* which means   “the Character of the Bodily agreeable feeling is the nature of taking up the sense of Desirable tactile object”. There is no doubt that taking up of the Desirable tactile object = the Character of Bodily agreeable Feeling is  the nature  of  taking up the Desirable tactile object.  (= *Itthaphotthabbanubhavana  lakkhana)*.    



(= Itthaphotthabbarammana, Itthamajjhatta photthabbarammana). In that Pleasure associated Body-consciousness (= Sukha sahagata kaya vinnana) there are (8) types of mentalities Consciousness and associated Mental concomitants. Among there, select the Bodily agreeable feeling (= Sukha Vedana) and, discern it. 



Character-  The natural Character of the Ultimate phenomena are the suparate natures which are not shared with other various phenomena. **Taking up and feeling the Sense-object** (= Anubhavana); is present in every occurence (= Sadharana Lakkhana) of all kinds of Feelings. (= Vedana). So, to mention that taking up of the Desirable tactile object is the seperate natural Character owned by the Bodily agreeable feeling, the Commentary teacher stated as: “Itthaphotthabbanubhavana Lakkhanam sukham”which means” the Character of the Bodily agreeable feeling is the nature of taking up the sense of Desirable tactile object". There is no doubt that taking up of the Desirable tactile object = the Character of Bodily agreeable Feeling in the nature  of taking up the Desirable tactile object.  


#### ***(= Itthaphotthabbanubhavana Lakkhana).  	 	 	(Mahāṭī-2-137)*** 


 **Essence  of  Augmentation (**= ***Upabruhana rasa***)---------This kind of (Function) Essence ie:- Augmenting the accumulation of associated phenomena is also possessed by the Mentally agreeable Feeling  (= *Cetasika sukha vedana*). But, in case of Mentally agreeable Feeling, the accumulation of associated phenomena is due to consideration. So, it is the effect of conditioning forces to which mental phenomena are subjected. 

(= *Cetobhisankhara*). In case of augmenting the accumulation of associated phenomena, it is a natural process without any kind of  consideration. So, the effect of augmenting the  accumulation of associated phenomena occur more exessively than in case of Mentally agreeable Feeling. That is why the Commentary teacher expressed  like “*Sampatyttanam  upabruhana  rasam”* = Having  (Function) Essence of Excessive  augmentation  in  accumulation of associated phenomena. (***Mahāṭī***-2-137)  



`           `**Perception-**------- The Bodily agreeable  Feeling is pleasurable in nature. So, it is known as Enjoyment with satisfaction (= *Assada*). That's why the Buddha says as follow:\_\_\_ 



 *Yam  bhikkhave  pancupadanakkhandhe  paticca  uppajjati  sukham  somanassam, ayam  vuccati  bhikkhave  pancupadanakkhasu  assado. (Sam-2-23-24)*  


### **PAGE-210** 


` 	`O----Monks----A certain kind of pleasure, enjoyment and satisfaction ie:- 

Mentally agreeable feeling (= *Somanassa = Cetasika sukha  vedana*) arises depending on the 

(5) types of Clinging = (5) groups of existence which form the objects of Clinging  

(= *Upadanakkhandha*).  So-----Monks; to this Mentally agreeable Feeling  

(= *Somanassa vedana*), it is suitable to say as Enjoyment with satisfaction (= *Assada*) to  (5)  

groups of existence which form the Object of Clinging. (Sam-2-23-24)   	Since,  the Bodily agreeable Feeling arises by depending on the Body  

transparent element, it is known as Bodily Feeling (= *Kayika)*. And, since it is pleasurable phenomena, it is also known as Enjoyable phenomenon (= *Assada*). So, to a meditator, who is discerning that Bodily Agreeable Feeling, it is perceived in the knowledge (= *Nana)* as a pleasurable  phenomenon, arises by depending on the Body Transparent Element (= *Kayapasada)*. (***Mahāṭī***-2-137-138) 



**Proximate cause:-------**The Bodily Agreeable Feeling arises by depending on Body transparent element which is also known as Faculty of Body or Physical Base of Bodily sensations (= *Kaya pasada, Kayindre, Kaya vatthu*). It can't arise on other Physical Bases (= *Vatthi*). That is why, the Faculty of the Body = Body transparent element is the Proximate cause of the Bodily Agreeable Feeling. (***Mahāṭī***-2-138) 




#### **2. Bodily  Disagreeable  Feeling (*Dukkha vedana*)** 


1. *Anitthaphotthabbanubhavana  lakkhanain  dukkham,* 
1. *Sampayuttanam  milapana  rasam*, 
1. *Kayikabadha  paccupatthanam*, 
1. *Kayindriya  padatthanam.* 



(Visuddhi-2-91) 

1. The nature of taking up the sense of Undesirable tactile object -------- Character, 
1. The nature which can lessen and fade the associated phenomena. ----- (Function) Essence, 
1. The nature which arises in the body and causes suffering---------------- Perception, 
1. Faculty of Body = Body transparent element --------------------------    Proximate cause  To understand the detail accounts,  refer to above described Bodily agreeable feeling. This Bodily Disagreeable Feeling (= *Dukkha vedana*) is the Feeling which arises in association with Pain associated Body-Consciousness (= *Dukkha sahagata kayavinnana citta)*.  So, select the Bodily disagreeable Feeling among the (8) types of Mentalities at the time of arising of Pain associated Body-Consciousness which  takes up the sense of Undesirable tactile object (= *Anitthaphotthabbarammana*). 


#### **3. Mentally  Agreeable  Feeling (*Somanassa vedana***)** 


1. *Ittha rammana  nubhavana  lakkhanam  somanassam*, 
1. *Yatha  tatha  va  itthakara  sambhoga  rasam*, 
1. *Cetasika  assada  paccupatthanam*, 
1. *Passaddhi  padatthanam*. (Vs-2-91) 
1. Taking-up  of  the  natural +  assumed Desirable-sense object ---------------- Character, 
1. Taking-up of the sense-object  as  Desirable one by natural or assumed ways. (Function) Essence, 
1. The  pleasant  nature which depends on the mind ------------------------------ Perception, 4. Tranquility  = Tranquility of Consciousness and Mental concomitants --Proximate cause. 


### **PAGE-211** 


`              `**Character------**The natural Desirable sense (= *Sabhava ittharammana)* = The sense object which is desirable originally in it's own nature, is known as Natural Desirable sense. When a sense  is  undesirable in it's own nature, but it is considered and treated as desirable sense, and then it is taken  up as Desirable sense. ie:-Assumed desirable sense. (= *Parikappaittharammana)*. (For example:-preserved salty fish-paste is originally undesirable sense. But, if it is properly treated, cooked and taken as meal; it will become desirable sense. That is, it become  Assumed desirable sense). Mentally Agreeable Feeling takes up the sense of both Natural Desirable sense and Assumed Desirable sense. So, taking up of the desirable sense, both naturally and by assumption is the Character of the Mentally Agreeable Feeling.  (***Mahāṭī***-2-138). 



`   `**Essence-------**If a person takes up and feels the Natural Desirable sense as desirable, it is the right feeling. When a person takes up Assumed Desirable sense as a desirable sense, it is the wrong feeling. The Mentally agreeable Feeling always takes up the sense as desirable one (= *Ittha*), whether it may be Natural Desirable Sense or not. That is, it always takes up the sense repeatedly. (***Mahāṭī***-2-138) 


### `           `**Proximate cause:---------** 
` 	 	 	 	`*Passaddhakayo sukham  vedayati.* (Sam-3-135) = A  person  

with tranquil  body has quiet  and peaceful feeling ----Referring to these words taught by the Buddha; the Commentary teacher explained that the proximate cause of the Mentally Agreeable Feeling is the Tranquility (= *Passaddhi*). But it is to be noted that in the words     “*Passaddhi padatthanam*” (= Tranquility of Consciousness and Mental concomitants as Proximate cause):-that feeling is Mentally Agreeable feeling which is not related to sensual desires ie:- it is free from sensual desires (= *Niramisa somanassa vedana)*.         



(***Mahāṭī***-2-138). 

` 	 	`In the “*Atthasalini* Commentary”,  the Character, Essence etc etc; of the 

Mentally Agreeable Feeling is described as follow:\_\_\_\_ 

` 	 	`*Vedayatiti  **vedana***, 

1. *Sa vedayita  lakkhana*, 
1. (a) *Anubhavana  rasa*, 
1. *Cetasika  assada  paccupatthana*, 
1. *Passaddhi  padatthana*. (***Abhi***-***A***-1-152) 

 The nature which recognises and takes up the taste of Sense-object is known as Feeling (= *Vedana*). 

1. The nature which takes up the taste of Sense-object ---------------------------      Character, 
1. (a) Feeling of Sense = taste of the Sense object--------------------         (Function) Essence, 

`    `(b) Next----Consumption of the desirable nature of the Sense-object --(Function) Essence, 

1. The pleasant nature which depends on the Consciousness -------------------        Perception,  4. Tranquility = Tranquility of the Consciousness and Mental concomitants ------ Proximate cause. 


### **PAGE-212** 


`        `**The Essence of taking up and feeling of the Sense-object (= *Anubhavana  rasa*)---**               The nature which feels the taste of Sense (= *Vedayita*) and the nature which takes up and feels the Sense-object (= *Anubhavana*)-----In this Mental concomitant; the Character and Essence (= *Vedayita, Anubhavana*) are similar in nature. The consumption of the Senseobject is the Character of that Mental concomitant Feeling (= *Vedana cetasika*). It is the (Function) Essence as well. 

 There is no Feeling in the (4) kinds of sphere like, Sensuous sphere, Fine material sphere, Immaterial sphere and Supramudane world (= *Kama, Rupa, Arupa,*     

 *Lokuttara)* which is lack of the Character of feeling the taste of sense (= *Vedayita lakkhana)*. The assumption that only the Bodily Agreeable Feeling (= *Sukha vedana*) has the Essence of taking up and feeling of the Sense-object (= *Anubhavana  rasa*) is rejected again.  So, it is appropriate to state that, all the Feelings (= *Vedana*) which may be Bodily Agreeable feeling or Indifferent mental Feeling (= *Sukha, Dukkha, Adukkhama sukha vedana*), have functional essence of taking up and feeling of the Sense-objects           (= *Anubhavana  rasa*). 



 Actually, in the main function of taking up the taste of Sense-object, other associated mental phenomena apart from the Feeling-concomitant, can only partially take up a little bit of the taste of that sense. The Contact (= *Phassa*) can just only touch the sense. The perception (= *Sanna*) can just recognise the sense. The Volition (= *Cetana*) can just urge and put up the associated phenomena to the sense and  finally, the Consciousness (= *Vinnana*) can just aware of the sense. So, just only touching the sense by the Contact, just only recognizing the sense by the Perception, just urging and putting up the associated phenomena to the sense by the Volition, and just awaring the sense by the Consciousness, are partial taking up and feeling of the taste of the Sense-object. Actually, the Feeling           (= *Vedana*) only is the deserving lord with full authority which can accomplish in taking up of the taste of the senseobject with the best of it's ability. So, that nature is known as the Essence of taking up and feeling of the Sense-object (= *Anubhavana  rasa)*. (In this explanation----- both the Character and Essence are same. ie:--taking up and feeling of the Sense-object)                        (***Abhi***-***A***-1-153)  


### **Another Example** 


The Feeling (= *Vedana*)  is like a King.  The remaining associated phenomena apart from the Feeling are like royal chef. After cooking the various delicious foods, the chef  prepares the meal in the ornamental container to serve the King. Before serving the meal to the King, the container is properly sealed (So as to prevent adding of poison to the foods). Then, the ornamental container is taken to the King, and the seal is removed after putting the container near the King. The lid of the container is opened. Then small amount of each and every foods in the container is taken as sample and put in a bowl. The chef eats these samples of foods first, so as to ensure the King that these are not poisoned. Only after then, the chef serves the King, various delicious foods. Then the King  partakes of foods as  a   deserving  monarch  with full authority and accomplishes to feel the taste of the required  food one after another with the best of his ability. 



In the above example, the chef eats samples of food to ensure the King that these are not poisoned, is similar to partial feeling of various associated phenomena to the taste of the sense-object. That's right----- the chef  takes up only small amount of the foods is similar to the partially taking up the sense by associated phenomena, apart from the Feeling (= *Vedana*). In contrast, the King  partakes of foods as a deserving monarch at his own desire is somewhat like the Feeling (= *Vedana*),  which perceives the Sense-object with the best of it's ability. So, that nature is explained as---the “Essence of taking up and feeling of the Sense-object”(= *Anubhavana rasa*). (***Abhi***-***A***-1-153) 



**PAGE-213** 


### **Next  Explanation** 


The Mentally Agreeable Feeling = Bodily Agreeable Feeling (= *Somassasa vedana, Sukha vedana)* of the Momentary Concentration (= *Khanika samadhi*) before the Attainment Absorption (= *Appana jhana*) = Preparatary concentration (= *Parikamma samadhi*), Neighbourhood Concentration (= *Upacara samadhi*) and the Mentally Agreeable Feeling of the Insight Knowledge---will be specially explained in  regard to the meditation of their Character-Essence etc;-as follow:---------   1. *Satalakkhana  sukham* (= *Somanassam*), 

2. *Sampayuttanam  upabruhana  rasam*, 
2. *Anuggahana  paccupatthanam*, 
2. *Passaddhi  padatthanam*. 



(***Abhi***-***A***-1-160) 

1. The nature which  makes   the living being in which it exists and the associated phenomena,  to be pleased in taking up the Sense object------------------------------    Character, 
1. The nature which promotes accumulation of associated phenomena ----(Function) Essence, 
1. The nature which praises the associated phenomena ---------------------  Perception, 4. Tranquility  = Tranquility of the Consciousness and Mental concomitants- Proximate cause, 



 *Sukhayatiti  sukham, yassa  uppajjati,  tam  sukhitam  karotiti  attho. Sutthu  va khadati, khanati  ca  kaya  cittabadhanti  sukham, somanassa vedanayetam  namam.*  (***AbhiA***-1-160) 



The nature which gives pleasure is known as Bodily and Mentally Bliss (=*Sukha*). If the nature of Bliss (= *Sukha*) arises in the body and mind contnuum of a living being, it is able to please that living being. In other words, it has ability to bite and excavate both kinds of Suffering (= *Dukka*) known  as  Bodily Suffering (= *Kayika abadha*) and Mental Suffering (= *Citta abadha*). In this case, the Bliss (= *Sukha*)  is the name of Mentally Agreeable Feeling (= *Somanassa vedana*). (***Abhi***-***A***-1-160) 



 The above mentioned Character-Essence etc;-of the Mentally Agreeable Feeling are the Character-Essence etc;-of the Great Wholesome Mentally Agreeable Feeling of the Sensuous Sphere (= *Kamavacara  maha kusala somanassa vedana*). This kind of Mentally Agreeable  Feeling is explained by the Commentary teacher in the Section of Aggregate of Contituents of Mental absorption (= *Jhananga  rasi*) as described above. So, this statement  is especially indicated to Mentally Agreeable Feeling in association with Impulsion consciousness of Neighbourhood  Absorption (= *Upacara jhana javana citta)* arising at the time of Neighbourhood Concentration (= *Upacara samadhi*), and the Mentally Agreeable Feeling in association with Impulsion Consciousness of Meditation                    (= *Vipassana javana cittaa)* in the section of Meditation. In case of Wholesome Consciousness of Finematerial Sphere (=*Rupavacara  kusala citta*), the Mentally Agreeable Feeling is in association with First, Second and Third Meditative Absorptions, according to classification of (4) types of Mental absorption. 

 In the”*Atthasalini* Commentary”(***Abhi***-***A***-1-213), it is stated that--“These (56) types of phenomena, stated in the Section of First Consciousness of Great Wholesome deed in sensuous Sphere (= *Kamavacara pathana mahakusala citta*)----from the Contact (= *Phassa*)-ellipsis..... to the Concentration (= *Avikkhepa = Samadhi*);----     are also stated in first Absorption of Fine-material Sphere (= *Rupavacara pathama jhana*). The only difference is the Sensuous Sphere and the Great Fine-material Sphere       (= *Kamavacara, Mahaggata rupavacara)*. Note also that other remaining phenomena, are similar to these phenomena, explained in the First Consciousness of Great Wholesome deed in Sensuous sphere “.----So,  note that method of meditation for Character-Essence etc; of the Mentalities of Sensuous Sphere and those of Fine-material-Sphere are generally same.  If there is difference, explanation will be given again. 


### **PAGE-214** 


 So, keep in mind that the Character-Essence etc; of the Mentally agreeable feeling, finally described above concern  with  the Mentally agreeable feeling associated with both kinds of the Great Wholesome deed in Sensuous Sphere and Wholesome deed in Finematerial Sphere. That is why these are the method  of  Meditations for the Feelings      (= *Vedana*) associated, especially with Neighbourhood absorption (= *Upacara jhana*) and Attainment absorbtion (= *Appana jhana*) in the fields of Neighbourhood Concentration and Attainment Concentration. (= *Upacara  samadhi,  Appana  samadhi)*. 

 The Feeling (= *Vedana*) is generally associated with the Rapture (= *Piti)* at the time of Neighbourhood and Attainment Absorptions. So, the Commentary teacher continued to describe the special accounts on the Rapture and the Happiness. (= *Piti, Sukha)*. 
**

**

**

### **Rapture  and  Happiness (*Piti-Sukha*)** 
** 

`             `Although the Rapture and Happiness occur simultaneously when the Rapture associated Consciousness arises, the nature which evokes in taking up the Desirable Sense

` 	 	`(= *Ittharammana*)  eg:-The Desirable Sense like Counter-Image of 

Mindfulness on In-and Out Breathing  (= *Anapana patibhaga  nimitta)*, is known as the Rapture (= *Piti*). The feeling of the taste of already attained Desirable Sense is known as the Happiness (= *Sukha*). If the Rapture arises in association with a certain Consciousness, the Happiness arises in association. On the contrary, if the Happiness arises in association with a certain Consciousness, the Rapture not always exists in association. The Rapture is included in the Aggregate of Mental formation (= *Sankharakkhandha*). The Happiness         (= *Sukha*) is included in the Aggregate of Feeling (= *Vedanakkhandha)*. Note the Rapture is like hearing and seeing by an exhausted visitor in the desert about the forest where the Great “*Zatassara*”lake is situated. The Happiness is similar to the drinking of the cold, clean water of the lake by that visitor. 

 One man, was going on a very difficult long journey, uneasy to reach  the end. Under severe heat of the sun, that man was very much tired and thirsty. On the way, he found another man and asked where the drinking water was available. The another man replied like” O.... my friend..... just beyond this forest, there is another large forest, in which is a great  “*Zatassara*” lake, where you will get water”. On hearing that, the tired visitor was very much pleased. 

 After going further, he felt very happy on seeing the petals, stalks and leaves of lotus flowers discarded by the other visitors. Further, he found men with wet cloths and hair. Next, he heard the crow, cry and sweet songs of common moorhen, peafowl and other birds. Again, he saw a large verdant and gloomy forest which looks like network of rubies surrounding the great lake “*Zatassara”*. In the lake, there were various lily flowers like blue lolus, sacred lotus, fabulous white water lily etc; (= *Uppala, Paduma, Kumudra*) and very clean water. 



 That man with much pleasure, took bath in the lake and drank the water. After bathing and drinking enough, all the sufferings caused by hot sun, tiresome journey and thirst were relieved. He also ate stalks and stamens of lotuses. 


### **PAGE-215** 


He adorned his hair with lily flowers and got on  the bank after taking some aquatic herbs. Then he changed the wet cloths and dried up these in the sun-heat. Finally, he took rest by lying on the ground and breathing gentle breeze. At that time, he was able to utter like “O... what a good pleasure”(= *Ahosukham*). Take this example in the mind. 



 The object of comparison and the subject of comparison (= *Upamana, Upameyya)* in the above example will be explained as follow :---The enjoyment felt at the time of hearing about the forest where “*Zatassara*”lake exists, and seeing of the clean water in the lake, is similar to the Rapture (= *Piti*). After bathing and drinking the water;  feeling of the pleasurable sense; when lying on the ground in the cold shade of a tree with full strength, 

 PAGE   \\* MERGEFORMAT 3
Translated by-**Dr Nyunt Lwin (SURGEON)** \*  PAGE   \\* MERGEFORMAT 3

breathing the gentle breeze and uttering like “O... what a good pleasure... O... what a good pleasure”is similar to the Happiness (= *Sukha*). 

 It is obvious that the Rapture and Happiness occur at the time of hearing the forest where *Zatassara* Lake is situated, at the time of entering the forest, at the time of seeing the water and at the time of bathing and drinking of water. So, late Subcommentary teachers explained as:--“The Rapture is the nature of having pleasure at the time of taking up the Desirable sense and the Happiness is the nature of feeling the taste of already attained Desirable sense.”  Actually, it is suitable to state that “The Rapture is associated with a certain Consciousness;  and to that Consciousness the Happiness is associated too”.  (***Abhi***-***A***-1-160-161) 


### **Greed  Rooted  Mentally  Agreeable  Feeling (*Lobhamula  somanassa  vedana***)** 


`               `The above mentioned Method of Meditation of the Character-Essence etc; are the method for Wholesome Mentally Agreeable Feeling of the Sensuous and Fine-material Spheres. For Unwholesome Greed rooted Mentally Agreeable Feeling, the Method of Meditation for Character-Essence-Perception etc; are same as above for Wholesome Mentally agreeable Feeling.   But, in Proximate cause (= *Padatthana)*, the Tranquility,       (= *Passaddhi)* is concerned only with the Mentally agreeable Feeling free from sensual desires (= *Niramisa  somanassa  vedana*) which is not related to Sensual pleasures           (= *Kamaguna)*.So, that Tranquility is not the Proximate cause of the Greed rooted Mentally agreeable Feeling. 

1. The Heart as a physical Base (= *Hadaya vatthu*) is the Proximate cause of the Mentally disagreeeable Feeling (= *Domanassa vedana)*. So, also, the Heart as a physical Base may be 



the Proximate cause of this Greed-rooted Menally agreeable feeling. 

1. The Desirable Sense (= *Ittharammana)*  which may be the Natural (= *Sabhava)* or the Assumed (= *Parikappa)*   may  also be the Proximate cause. 
1. According to the doctrine that, the Feeling arises due to the arising of the contact = *Phassa samudaya vedana samudayo*;-----the associated mental phenomena led by the Contact which arise with that Menally agreeable Feeling may also be the Proximate cause. 

`  `So, among these (3) kinds, may be only one or all (3) kinds, is the possible Proximate cause of the Greed rooted Mentally agreeable Feeling.  Consider in similar way in case of the Mentally agreeable Feeling which arises in association with the Rootless Glad mindedness Investigating Consciousness (= *Ahetuka  somanassa  santirana citta*). 


### **PAGE-216** 


**4. Mentally Disagreeable Feeling** 
#### **(*Domanassa vedana)*** 


1. *Anittha 	rammana 	nubhavaner 	lakkhanam 	domassam*,                        
1. *Yatha tatha va anitthakara-sambhoga rasam*, 
1. *Cetasika badha paccupatthanam*, 
1. *Ekanteneva hadaya vatthu palatthanam*. (***Abhi***-***A***-1-298. Visuddhi-2-9) 



1. Taking-up of the natural and assumed Undesirable-Sense-object------------- Character, 
1. Taking-up of the Sense-object as Undesirable one by natural or assumed ways ------------------------(Function) Essence, 
1. Unpleasant  nature depending on the mind  = The nature which depends and tortures the mind--------------------Perception, 
1. The Heart  as a Physical Base definitely  --------------------------------Proximate cause. 



 The Natural Undesirable Sense is the Undesirable sense object in it's own natural way. The Assumed Undesirable sense is originally the Desirable sense, but taken up as Undesirable due to the Unwise Attention (= *Ayonisomanasikara*). The heretics who are against the teachings of the Buddha, assume the Buddha who is actually Extremely Desirable sense (= *Ati ittharammana*) as Undesirable one. If someone takes up the Natural Undesirable sense as undesirable way; it is the proper way of sensual uptake. If someone takes up the Natural desirable sense as Undesirable one by assumption in undesirable way, it is the unproper way of sensual uptake. To this phenomenon----the explanation that “Whether it is right or wrong, taking up of the Natural Undesirable or Assumed Undesirable  Senses, in an  undesirable  way is  the **(Function) Essence of the Mentally Disagreeable Feeling”**--- is given. 



**Perception:-------**If someone is angry with others, that person  usually says like “It  is  very  hurtful  to  me “.   It's  a  kind of grievous mentality. To this kind of grief, the statement  as  the unpleasant nature depending on the mind or the nature  which depends and tortures the mind; is given. That is, it is conceived as   mental grief in the knowledge of a meditator, discerning the Mentally Disagreeable Feeling. 

**Proximate cause-----**Since, Mentally Disagreeable Feeling occurs in the Cosmic entity of sensual pleasures (= *Kamaloka  dhatu*), also known as the (11) realms sensual pleasure (= *Kamabhumi*) or planes of existence where craving for sensual pleasures is intrinsic  (= *Kamadhatu*), it definitely depends on the Heart as a physical Base                   (=* 

*Hadaya vattu*) for it's occurence. So, the Heart as a physical Base in the most important  Proximate cause of the Mentally Disagreeable Feeling.         (***Mahāṭī***-2-138)  

 Select the Mentally Disagreeable Feeling among the various mentalities of the group of Hatred, group of Hatred-Envy, gorup of Hatred-Stringiness and group of Hatred-Remorse. (= *Dosa, Issa, Macchiriya, Kukkucca)*. Then discern the Character-Essence etc etc; of that Mentally Disagreeable Feeling.  
**

##### **5. Indifferent Mental Feeling (*Upekkha vedana*)** 


1. _Majjhatta  vedayita  lakkhanam  **upekkha**_**,**  
1. *Sampayuttanam  natiupabruhanamilapana  rasa,* 
1. *Santabhava  paccupatthana*, 


### **PAGE-217** 


 4. *Nippitika  citta  padatthana*.                                                                (Visuddhi-2-91)  



1. The nature of Neutral feeling of the Natural and Assumed Moderately desirable object -----

-------------------------Character, 

1. The nature which neither promotes accumulation nor lessen the associated  phenomena ---

-----------------(Function) Essence, 

1. The nature of calmness and quietness   --------------------------------Perception, 4. The Consciousness lack of Rapture  = The Consciousness which is not associated with Rapture ---------------------------Proximate cause. 

 This Indifferent Mental Feeling has the Character of taking up the Moderately desirable object which may be natural or assumed. In other words it has the Character of taking up the sense with equanimity. That is, the taken-up Sense as well as the feeling are neutral in nature. So, the Indifferent Mental Feeling has the Character of taking up Moderately Desirable Sense (= *Majjhattarammana*) which may be natural or assumed  with equanimity **(= *Majjhattavedayita lakkhana)*.**  

 Since, it has the feeling of Moderately desirable sense which may be natural or assumed with equanimity; it aslo has the nature which neither promotes accumulation nor lessen the associated phenomena as it's **(Function**) **Essence.** 

 The statement that “It is perceived in the Insight knowledge of a meditator as the nature of calmness and quietness”**(= *Santabhava  paccupatthana*)---**is meant   for the pure, sinless Indifferent Mental Feeling (= *Upekkhavedana*) which is not concerned with sensual pleasures (= *Kamaguna*). The statement is not meant for all kinds of Indifferent Mental Feelings. (***Mahāṭī***-2-238) 


### **The  Concept  of  Venerable  Maharsi  Sayadaw** 


` 	`Venerable Maharsi Sayadaw who wrote “*Visuddhimagga  **Mahāṭī**ka  nissaya*  Scripture”gave  following  remark in the Section of  ***Mahāṭī**kanissaya*.  

 If one assumed that, although it is Unwholesome Indifferent Mental Feeling  (= *Akusala upekkha*), it is more calm and quiet than Unwholesome Mentally Agreeable and Disagreeable Feeling (= *Akusala somanassa,  Domanassa*). 

` 	`So, it is appropriate to perceive  all the Indifferent Mental Feeling (= *Upekkha*) in the Insight knowledge of a meditator as the nature of calmness and quietness  (= *Santabhava paccupatthana*). *(Visuddhimagga **Mahāṭī**kanissaya-3-316)*  


### **Absorptive  Indifferent  Mental  Feeling**  
#### **(*Jhanupekkha***)**  
1. *Majjhatta  lakkhana  jhanupekkha*,  
1. *Anabhoga rasa*, 
1. *Abyapara  paccupatthana*,  
1. *Pitiviraga  padatthana.* 	(***Abhi***-***A***-1-218)  



1. The nature which is in the middle way  	---------------------------------------- 	Character,  
1. Not feeling, even the excellent pleasure (= *Panita sukha*) --------------- (Function) Essence,  
1. The nature not anxious for excellent pleasure.--------------------------------- 	Perception, 


### **PAGE-218** 


`  `Next-----It gives benefit of not being anxious about the excellent pleasure by the  

associated  phenomena                                   -------------------------(Fruition) Perception, 4. The nature of  dislike of happiness = The nature which overcomes happiness = Rapture  

(= *Piti*)  	 	 	 	 	 	 	--------------------------------

Proximate cause. 



` 	`This Absorption Indifferent Mental Feeling is not Indifferent Mental Feeling  

(= 	*Upekkha 	vedana*) 	associated 	with 	Fourth 	Mental 	Absorption  

(= *Catuttha jhana*). It is the Equanimity Mental concomitant (= *Tatramajjhattata*) which is associated with Third Mental absorption. That Equanimity Mental concomitant, known also as Indifferent equanimity (= *Tatramajjhattupekkha*) arises also with First and Second Mental absorptions. But in these occasion, the function of that Indifferent equanimity Mental concomitant is not distinct.-----So, Buddha does not mention as “accompanied with  Indifferent equanimity mental concomitant”= *Upekkhako ca viharati*----Only in this third Mental absorption, Buddha says as “accomphished with Indifferent equanimity mental concomitant”= *Upekkhako ca viharati*.  Since,  the Thought conception (= *Vitakka*) and the Discursive Thinking (= *Vicara*) are overwhelming in First absorption and the Rapture (= *Piti*) is overwhelming in Second Mental absorption, the function of this Indifferent equanimity Mental  concomitant is not  distinct. But, in the Third  Mental absorption, the nature of Thought conception, Discursive thinking and the Rapture (= *Vitakka, Vicara, Piti)* are not overwhelming, but the Indifferent Equanimity is arising like a leader. So, the Buddha specially mentions the Indifferent Equanimity mental concomitant.  (***Abhi***-***A***-1-218) 

 In this instance, the Indifferent Equanimity keeps the associated mentalities in the middle ignorant way so as to prevent enthusiasm or retreat in taking up of the sense object of Image of Tranquility meditation (= *Samatha nimitta)* such as  Counter-Image of Mindfulness on  In-and Out-breathing (= *Anapana  patibhaga  nimitta*), and Counter-Image of Meditation device (= *Kasina pannatti patibhaga nimitta*) etc.  Select that Indifferent Equanimity mental Concomitant (= *Tataramajjhttata  cetasika*) among the mentalities of Third mental absorption (= *Tatiya  jhana*) and discern   it's Character, Essence----etc. 



**Essence  of  no  feeling  even  to  Excellent  pleasure  (= *Anabhogarasa***)**-**-----Since,          	  it   has no interest in the Craving (= *Tanha*) even in the precious excellent pleasure of the noble  Third mental absorption; it is opposite in nature to that Craving  = It is opposite  in function to the Craving. So, it is stated that, it has the function of not feeling even the excellent pleasure (= *Panita sukha*) like the pleasure of Third mental absorption. 

 (Mulati-1-103). This pleasure of Third Mental absorption is the top-most pleasure among all kinds of Mundane pleasure (= *Lokiya sukha*); so it is known as Excellent pleasure (= *Panita sukha*).  

 Again, the Character-Essence etc;-of the Indifferent Mental Feeling (= *Upekkha vedana*) is further described in the section of Fourth mental absorption of fine-material Sphere (= *Rupavacara  catutttha  jhana*) as follow:--------- 


### **Indifferent  Mental  Feeling** 
#### **(*Adukkha   ma  sukha = Upekkha vedana*)** 
1. *Itthanittha  viparitanubhavana  lakkhana  upekkha*,  
1. *Majjhata   rasa*,  
1. *Avibhuta  paccupatthana*, 
1. *Sukhanirodha  padatthana.* (***Abhi***-***A***-1-222)  



 1. It has the nature to take up the Moderately desirable object  

(= *Itthamajjhattarammana*) which is opposite to Desirable object (= *Ittharammana*) and Undesirable object (= *Anittharammana*), (= It feels the taste of Moderately desirable  object) 

` 	 	 	 	 	 	 	`---------------------------------- Character, 
**

### **PAGE-219** 


2. It keeps in the nature of middle way (= *Majjhatta*) = Ignorance    ---(-Function) Essence, 
2. The nature of non-conspicuous Feeling   	--------------------------------  Perception, 
2. The extinction of bliss (= *Sukha*) = (Neighbourhood Concentration = Upacara of  

Fourth Mental absorption where the Bliss is totally extinct)  -----------  Proximate cause. 

 In this Fourth Mental absorption there is no suffering (= *Adukkha*) as well as no pleasure (= *Asukha*). With the word no-suffering nor-pleasure (= *Adukkha-masukham*), it mentions the Third Feeling (= *Vedana*) which is opposite to suffering and pleasure of the Fourth Mental absorption. It mentions not only the absence of both suffering and pleasure but it mentions the Third Feeling (= *Vedana*), named Feeling of no-Suffering  nor  pleasure (= *Adukkha masukha vedana*). It is known also as Indifferent Mental Feeling  (= *Upekkha vedana*). That Feeling of no-suffering nor-pleasure has the Character of taking up the sense of Moderately desirable object which is opposite in nature to Desirable Sense and Undesirable Sense. (***Abhi***-***A***-1-222)  



 According to this nature; note that the Sense object of the Indifferent Mental Feeling in the Fourth Mental Absorption is the Moderately Desirable Object.  Again, the  Feeling exists in the middle way (= *Majjhatta*) and has the Function of ignorance.  So,  

taking up the Sense is also with the Middle feeling.  That is, both the Sense-object and the 

Feeling have the nature of middle status. 	 	 	 	 	 



 Further explanation will be given so as to avoid confusion. This Fourth Mental Absorption is reached,---according to discourse in quadruple (= *Catukka*), by practising step by step, based on the First, Second and Third Mental Absorptions. If you, noble meditator set up the Concentration (= *Samadhi*) according to the discourse in quadruple, from the First to Fourth Mental absorption by taking up the very pure clean and glowing Sense of the CounterImage of Mindfulness on In-and Out-breathing (= *Anapana patibhaga nimitta*); it is to be noted that the sense objects of the First, Second and Third Mental absorption are also  clean and glowing Sense of the Counter-Image of Mindfulness on In-and Out  Breathing. The sense object of all four kinds of mental absorption is  clean and glowing Sense of the CounterImage of Mindfulness on In-and Out-Breathing only.  So, the  Sense-object  is  similar in all. 

 But, that Sense of the Counter-Image of Mindfulness on In-and-Out Breathing in the First and Second Mental Absorptions is Desirable object. On the contrary, that sense is Moderately Desirable object in the Third and Fourth Mental absorptions. In the Third Absorption, as described in the Section of Absorptive Indifferent Mental Feeling (= *Jhanupekkha)*;--due to the power of the Equanimity Mental Concomitant (= *Tatramajjhattata  cetasika)* associated with Third absorption; all the associated mental phenomena connected with that Third absorption can keep that Sense of Counter-Image of Mindfulness on In-and Out Breathing, in the Middle moderately Desirable status (= *Itthamajjhatta*). That is; the Sense is in the middle status (= *Majjhatta*), but the Feeling has the nature of pleasure (= *Sukha*). 

 On the contrary, in case of Fourth Absorption, the Sense object as well as the Feeling are in the Middle status (= *Majjhatta*)  Why ?------ 



`  `The Pleasant Feeling (= *Sukha vedana*) arises by taking up the very clean and glowing Sense of Counter-Image of Mindfulness on In-and Out-Breathing before reaching the Fourth mental absorption. But, from attainment of Neighbourhood Concentration  (= *Upacara samadhi*) in Fourth absorption, that Pleasant Feeling (= *Sukha vedana*) is  abolished. The Indifferent Mental Feeling (= *Upekkha vedana)* begins to arise. Due to the support of the Equanimity Mental Concomitant (= *Tatramajjhattata cetasika*)-----which gains sharp and energetic power at the time of Third absorption----the Indifferent Mental Feeling and associated mentalities  in connection with the Fourth Absorption are gaining full power and able to keep the Sense of Counter-Image of Mindfulness on In-and-Out Breathing in the Middle status (= *Majjhatta*). So, the Fourth absorption and associated mental  phenomena;--supported by the power meditation based on the Equanimity Mental concomitant and Indifferent Mental Feeling; 


### **PAGE-220** 


---are able to keep the Sense object in the Middle status and feels the taste of the Sense object in the middle way. That is why, both the Sense-object and Feeling are middle in nature. 


### **Perception  as  Non-distinct  Nature  (= *Avibhuta  paccupatthana*)**  
The pleasure (= *Sukha*)   and  the Suffering (= *Dukkha)* are distinct feelings. These Agreeable and Disagreeable Feelings (= *Sukha vedana, Dukkha vedana*), are very distinctly perceived in the Insight knowledge of Meditators. But, the Feeling of no-Suffering nor pleasure (= *Adukha  ma sukha vedana*) is not so conspicuous as in case of the Feeling of Pleasure and Suffering.  So,  a meditator who is discerning the Indifferent Mental Feeling;  that Indifferent Mental Feeling is perceived in the Insight knowledge as not distinct feeling, like the Sense taken up by  the Feeling of Pleasure and Suffering (= *Sukha vedana, Dukkha vedana*). It is somewhat like foot prints of a deer which runs on the stone slab.  So, in *Pali* text; that nature is expressed as knowledge obtained by the method of searching the foot prints of a deer on the rock slab(= *Migapada valanja naya*).. (Mulati-1-1o4)  
**

**

### `            `**Proximate cause-**------- 
\* 

*Sukha  nirodho  nama  idha  catutthajhanupacaro.* (Sarttha-1-379)  



 The extinction of Feeling of Pleasure (= *Sukha vedena*) begins at the time of Neighbourhood concentration (= *Upacara samadhi*) in the Fourth absorption. Only after the extinction of that Feeling of Pleasure,  the  Indifferent Mental Feeling can arise. So, the Neighbourhood Concentration of the Fourth mental absorption (= *Catuttha jhanupacara*)---when the Feeling of Pleasure no longer exists is the Proximate cause of the Indifferent Mental Feeling. 

 Again, the Character-Essence ---etc; of the Equanimity of the Sublime or Divine States of Living (= *Upekkha  brahmavihara*), included in  the (4) kinds of Sublime or Divine States of Living (= *Brahma vihara*), occuring in Mental absorption of Fine-material Sphere (= *Rupavacara  jhana*), are described in the “*Atthasalini*”Commentary and “*Visudhimagga*”Commentary. The basis of the Equanimity of the Divine States of Living  (= *Upekkha brahma vihara)* is the Equanimity  Mental Concomitant (= *Tatramajjhattata  cetasika)*. See, the Character-Essence etc-etc; of that Equinimity of the Divine States of Living (= *Brahmaviharupekkha*) in the Chapter of the Equanimity Mental Concomitant of the Divine States of Living (= *Brahmavihara cetasika*). 





**This  is  the  end  of  the  Chapter  of  Speech  on  Aggregate  of  Feeling.** 















**PAGE-221** 
**

## **The  Chapter  of  Speech  on  Aggregate  of  Perception**  
###  **(*Sannakkhandha  katha*)**  


1. *Sanjanana  lakkhana  sanna*,  
1. *Tadevetanti  puna  sanjanana  paccayanimitta  karanarasa*, (*Darudesu tacchakadayo viya.*),  
1. *Yathagahitanimitta  vasena  abhinivesakarana  paccupatthana*,  

` 	 	`(*Hatthidassaka andha  viya*)  

1. *Yathaupatthi  ta  visaya padatthana*.  (*Tinapurisakesu  migapotakanam  purisati uppanna sanna viya*) (Visuddhi-2-92.) 



1. *Sanjanana lakkhana sanna*,  
1. (a) *Paccabhinnana rasa*,  

`    `(b) *Puna sanjanana paccaya nimitta karana rasa* (*Daruadisu ttcchakadayo viya*)  3. (a) *Yathagahita nimitta vasena abhinivesakarana paccupatthana*, (*Hatthi dassaka andha viya*.)  

`     `(b) *Arammane anogalha vutti taya aciratthana paccupatthana va* (*Vijju viya.*)  4.*Yatha upatthi tavisaya padatthana*. 

` 	 	`(*Tina purisakesu migapotakanam purisati uppannasanna  viya*.) (***Abhi***-

***A***-1-153-154.)  

1. Awarness of various sense objects like brown, golden etc, etc; by noting down = the 

nature of knowing by noting down  	 	 	 	 	--------------------- 

Character,  

1. (a) Knowing again by initial mental note   	-------- (Function) Essence,  

   2) Making record which is the cause of reknowing the noted memory like " That is 

that "   	 	 	 	 	 	--------- (Function) Essence, 

` 	 	`(It is somwhat like a carpenter's mark on the wooden objects.) 

1. (a) The nature of perception of Sense object in accordance with the remark (= Note) 

kept in the mind. 	 	 	 	-------------------- Perception,  

` 	 	`(Bear in mind like a blind man feeling the elephant.) 

2) The nature which won't last long since there is no deep consideration to Sense object     = Sense object is not deeply taken up      ------------

------- Perception, 

` 	 	`(Bear in mind like a flash of Lightning.) 

1. Taking up of Sense object as such  	 	------------- Proximate cause, 

` 	 	`(Bear in mind like perception to a scarecrow as a person by animals.) 





**PAGE-222** 


#### **Perception Based on Wisdom** 
**(*Nanasampayutta  sannna*)** 



***Pāli Quotation*** 

***(Abhi-A-1-154)*** 

***(Mahāṭī-2-139)*** 


#### **Structural  Earth  element** --------- 


`  `In (6) Doors and various Body  parts where the naturel power of Earth element is excessive, the materialities in the respective groups of matters like Water elements, Fire elements, Air-elements, Appearance, Smell, Taste and Nutritive essence which arise together with Earth element are known as **Structural materialities** (**= *Sambhara***). The 

Earth element arising together with these structural matters is known as **Earth element of Structural matters** (**= *Sasambhara pathavi dhatu***). In the field of Conventional truth; using the words of mundane world, the Earth element of structural matter is the soil or ground which you can see. It is the Earth elements. In Ultimate truth sense, this earth is nothing but, it is the collection of groups of Temperatureproduced nutritive essence-octad matter  (= *Utujaojatthamaka rupa kalapa*); in which natural power of the Earth element is in excess. Since the natural power of  Earth element is excessive in each and every groups of matters (= *Rupa kalapa*), the earth or ground has character of hardness               (= *Kakkhala lakkhana*). Since, the remaining materialities apart from the Earth element in the groups of matter follow the nature of Earth element which natural power is in excess,  the whole earth or soil which is formed by groups of Temperature produced octad matter     (= *Utuja attha rupa kalapa*) also follows the Earth element which has the nature of hardness. So, the earth or soil also has the nature of  hardness. (In this instance, it means that in the earth, the natural power of hardness owned by the Earth element which natural power is in excess is obvious. It does not mean that the Character of Water, Fire and Air element change into the Character of hardness. There is no such thing that the natural Character of the Ultimate phenomena transform. Only the level of the natural power may increase or decrease.  So, it means that, in this earth, the natural power of hardness owned by the Earth element is in excess and the natural power of Water, Fire and Air element are less.)  

`  `The fire is the Fire element of structural matter (= *Sasambhara tejo dhatu*). Discern to conceive the (4) Primary elements in the fire. For a  meditator like you noble one, who is able to discern materialities and mentalities in both livings and non-livings of external World, discernment of (4) Primary elements in the fire is not difficult task.  If   (4) Primary elements are perceived with knowledge, particles of Nutrive-essence octad groups of matter (= *Ojatthamaka rupa kalapa*) will be conceived soon. Fire is nothing but collection of Sound-nonad groups of matter (= Sadda   novaka   kalapa) where there are sound of Nutritive-essence octad groups of matters. When the remaining matters apart from the Fire element in respective groups of matter have less natural power, they follow the nature of Fire  element with excessive power. 

`  `The Air also is the Air element of structural matter. (= *Sasambhara vayo*). Discern to conceive the (4) Primary elements in the air. You will see only the paricles of groups of matter. The air in the non-living external world is the collection of Nutritive essence octad groups of matter and Sound-nonad groups of matters. 

 [ In the air that rises up (= *Uddhangama vata*) known as Air component of body (= *Vayo kotthasa*) etc, of living beings are, as described in Meditation of materiality,  composed of (33) types of materiality. ] 


#### **PAGE-223** 


In these various groups of matter, remaining materialities apart from the Air  element, follow the nature of Air  element which natural power is in excess. 

 The water is the Water-element of structural matter (= *Sasambhara apo*) (which means the water in the non-living world.) Discern that water so as to see the (4) Primary elements. Particles of groups of matter will easily be seen. In these groups of matter, the matter apart from the Water element will follow the nature of the Water element which natural power is in excess.  



***Pāli Quotation*** 

***(Mahāṭī-2-139)*** 



Similar to above descriptions, if the Perception (= *Sanna*) is based on Wisdom  

(= *Nnana*), ie: --- Wisdom associated Perception (= *Nnana sampayutta sanna*); that Perception always follows the Wisdom. Since, it always follows the Wisdom, that Wisdom associated Perception never bears in mind the Sense-object in wrong way (= *Abhinivesa*), and never recognises the the Sense-object in abnormal way (= *Viparitaggaha*). (***Abhi***- ***A***-1-154.***Mahāṭī***-2-139.)  

`  `According to above explanations, note that the Perception which is associated with Insight knowledge (= *Vipassana nana*) always follows the Insight Knowledge. Insight knowledge deeply knows the actual nature of the Sense-object which is the Ultimate true phenomenon. Due to the power of that Insight knowledge, the Perception also recognized the actual nature of the Sense-object, in it's memory.   If the Perception is associated with Great Wholesome deed without Wisdom (= *Maha kusala nanavippayutta sanna*), since it is not associated with Wisdom, it always follows the Consciousness (= *Vinnana*). All the Consciousness take the function as main leader of the(4) Aggregates of Mentality (= *Namakhandha*) (= *Pubbangama -rasam*), it is explained that Perception probably follows the Consciousness. In case of Resultant and More action, note in similar way as Great Wholesome deed. 

`  `Again, since all the phenomena of Fine-material Sphere and Immaterial Sphere are the works of Concentration and led by Concentration as main leader, the Perception associated with these Concentrations of Absorption in Fine-material and Immaterial Spheres always follow the Concentration. According to this description, if the Impulsion consciousness of Insight meditation is without Wisdom (= *Nana vippayutta*), the Perception always follows the Concentration in association with taht Impulsion consciousness of Insight-meditation. Since, the Perception based on Concentration (*Samadhisampayutta  sanna*) always follows the Concentration, that Perception never fails to take up the Sense object or Sense of Insight meditation. So long as the Concentration keeps on the Sense of Tranquility (= *Samatha arammana*) like Counter-Image of Mind fulness on In-and-Out-breathing  (= *Anapanapatibhaga nimitta*) or Sense of Image of Formations (= *Sankhara nimitta*), the Perception also keeps on the Sense of Tranquility and Sense of Image of Formation for long duration. 

` 	 	 	 	 	 	 	      `(***Mahāṭī***-2-139.)  

 In Supremundane World, since all the Consciousness of Supramundane Path and Fruition are certainly associated with Wisdom; these Knowledges of  Path and Fruition certainly take up the Sense of *Nibbana*. So, the Perception also certainly takes up the Sense of *Nibbana*. Since, the Knowledge of Path and Fruition deeply realize the pleasant and peaceful nature of *Nibbana*, the Perception also deeply recognises that pleasant and peaceful nature. This is how the Perception is valuable and useful in the practice of Wholesome deeds.  


#### **PAGE-224** 


` 	`But, Perception (= *Sanna*) is a Mental concomitant associated with both  

Wholesome and Unwholesome deeds. So, it occurs not only in good actions, but also in evil actions. That is why the Unwholesome Perception (= *Akusala sanna*) associated with Greed, Wrong view and conceit (= *Raga*, *Ditthi*, *Mana*) always occurs following these Unwholesome phenomena of Greed, Wrong View and Conceit.                      

(***Mahāṭī***-2-139.)  

 Among the (12) types of Perversions (= *Vippallasa*), the (4) Perverted perceptions (= *Sanna vippallasa*) based on wrongly recognizing Perception are groups of Unwholesome mentalities and perceive truely right Formative  conditions (= *Sankhara dhamma*) like Impermanence, Suffering, Not-self and Impurity in wrong way as Permanence, Pleasure, Self and Purity. Based on Perverted perception which wrongly recognises the Sense-objects as Permanence, Pleasure, Self and Purity, the Perverted Consciousness   (= *Citta vipallasa*) which also wrongly thinks as Permanene, Pleasure, Self and Purity arises. Next, Perverted View (= *Ditthi vipallasa*) continues to arise, which wrongly conceives as Permanence, Pleasure, Self and Purity. All these Unwholesome Perverions are able to deeply sink down the beings to the bottom of ceaseless cycles of sufferings        (= *Samsara vatta dukkha*) like ceaseless cycles of Lower Worlds (= *Apaya samsara vatta*) without any chance of escape.  According to the explanation described in the Great Subcommentary, this wrongly recognizing Perverted perception also is leading to Unwholesome phenomena like Greed, Wrong veiw, Conceit and Delusion. In other words, it is a phenomenon which is alway following these Unwholesome deeds. 



`           `**Character  -------**  If one perceives brown, yellow, white, red as brown, yellow, white red  or; long, short as long, short  or; father, mother, aunts, uncles as father, mother, aunts, uncles or;  sweet, sour as sweet sour or; designted names of Ultimate realities like Contact, Feeling etc, as Contact, Feeling  or;  nature of striking (= *Phusana sabhava*) and nature of feeling (= *Anubhavana sabhava*) of these Ultimate realities like Contact, Feeling as the nature of these etc etc  ----  what so ever it may be, if a meditator becomes able to take up the real nature of Ultimate truths with Insight knowledge or, if one realizes these as Contact or Feeling, somewhat like children just remember various object as such:--- such kind of  recognition is known as  " Character of Recognition of Sense by memory "  

(= *Sanjanana sabhava lakkhana*). Note that, recognition of the true nature of Ultimate realities follows, as described above, the Wisdom. 

`   `**Essence ---------**The carpenters  usually make marks on wood blocks with pencil so as to remember the correct sites to work again when they are making or repairing wooden objects  and structures. They remember again by seeing these marks. Making marks so as to remember again is the function of Perception. Recognition in accordance with these marks is the natural power or natural Character of Perception. 

 If  these two Character and Essence (Function) are considered in connection ------  it is to be noted that Perception notes down for future rememberance. It also recognises according to  that note. In knowing again that note, Perception further notes down again the marks for better recognition in future ----. So, that kind of the nature of Perception will be  obviously seen. Preceeding  Perception notes down the Sense-object so as to remember again. Similarly, following Perception also notes down the Sense-object so as to remember again. 


#### **PAGE-225** 


So, note equally that all Perceptions  make  marks so as to remember again. 

 Such  awareness by repeated  recognitions  may be right or wrong. The Perception which arises in connection with Insight Knowledge is right perception and since having some natural power to attain   *Nibbana*, it is beneficial to associated phenomena like Right view of Insight meditation etc; etc;  with Conditioning powers (= *Paccaya  satti*) like  conascence condition, Mutuality condition etc. If Insight Knowledge deeply knows the materialities which are real Ultimate truth phenomena, the Perception also recognizes these Materialities as real Materialities. Again, if Insight knowledge deeply knows the mentalities which are real Ultimate truth phenomena, the Perception also recognizes these Mentalities as real Mentalities. If Insight knowledge deeply knows the nature of cause and effect, the Perception  also recognizes these nature as cause and effect. If Insight knowledge deeply knows the Formative conditions as Impermanence, the Perception also recognizes as Impermanance. If Insight knowledge deeply knows the Formative Conditions as Sufferings, the Perception  also recognises  these as Sufferings. If Insight Knowledge definitely knows the Formative conditions as Not-self, the Perception also recognizes these as  Not-self. So, the Perception always follows the Insight knowledge which deeply and definitely knows the signs of  Impermanence, Suffering and Not-self. That kind of Perception is very valuable. It doesn't mean for Perception which recognizes the Materiality, Mentality, Causes, and Effect etc; etc; by hearing the teachings of others  or masters.  

 Again, deep and wrong remembrance due to repeated Perception in wrong way may cause Perverted perception  (= *Sanna vipallasa*). That kind of Perverted perception can not be abolished even by the teachings of successive Omniscient Buddha.  

 In conclusion, just remembrance of Sense object, may be due to previous awareness or awareness of new one; is the natural power of Perception. That remembrance may be right or wrong.  



`               `**Perception -------** In this instance, it is explained by giving an example of six blind men feeling the elephant. (= *Hatthi dassaka andha viya*). Six blind men, after feeling the elephant, perceived the appearance of the animal in different ways in accordance with the parts they felt. So, first blind man who felt the trunk noted and said that the elephant looked like a snake. Second man, who felt the tusk, perceived and said that the animal looked like a pestle. Third man, after feeling the ear of the elephant said, it looked like a mat. Fourth blind  man who felt the body, noted and said that elephant looked like a wall. Fifth one who felt the leg, said the elephant looked like a house pillar and finally the sixth blind  man after feeling the tail of the elephant, perceived and announced that the elephant looked like a broom. So, the Perception is accepted in the  Knowledge of a meditator discerning it as the nature that conceives the Sense-object according to the note taken up by the mind  and  which may be right or wrong. 



**Proximate casue -------** The wild deer living in  a   jungle near the hill-side cultivation, on seeing a scarecrow resembling a watchman, wrongly thinks it as a real man in the mind. 


#### **PAGE-226** 


Similarly, the Perception, without any consideration, usually note down the Senseobject striking the respective Sense-Door as such in the mind. So, all kinds of Senseobjects are the Proximate cause for Perception.  

`  `Since, the Perception conceives every kinds of Sense objects without any further consideration, all kinds of Sense-objects are the Proximate Cause for Perception. 

`  `The Perception in connection with Wisdom (= *Nana sampayutta sanna*) always follows the Wisdom. Since, Wisdom is the Right view (= *Samma ditthi*), and  the Right view has the nature of endless penetrating  knowledge without any mistakes to perceive   the Right view of belief in Actions and their results, Right view of Absorption, Right view of  Insight knowledge, Right view of Path and Right view of Fruition. So,  in other words it  is  also  able  to  comprehend 





`  `the four Noble Truths. That is why the Perception which always follows that Knowledge of Right View (= *Sammaditthi nana*) recognizes properly and there is no such thing as   wrong taking up of the Sense (= *Micchabhinivesa*) or  unproper  taking up of Sense             (= *Viparitaggaha*).  If  the Perception is connected with 

Concentration  

(= *Samadhi sampayutta  sanna*)  like Neighbourhood Concentration,  Attainment  Concentration  and  Wisdom not associated Insight Concentration  (= *Upacara samadhi*,  *Appana samadhi*,  *Nana vippayutta vipassana samadhi*) etc; etc;- the Perception always follows that Concentration. So, there  is no  such  thing that Concentration connected  Perception has the nature of short fixing of Concentration on a single Sense object. So long as the Concentration exists, the Perception also exists. If the Perception is associated with Greed, Wrong view, Conceit and Delusion, ie:- if it is Unwholesome Perception  (= *Akusala sanna*), note that, it always arises following the Greed, Wrong view, Conceit and Delusion.                        (***Mahāṭī***-2-139.)  





` 	`**This  is  the  End  of  the Chapter of  Speech  on  Aggregate  of  Perception**. 




 PAGE   \\* MERGEFORMAT 3
