# 2.1 Develop concentration

Every gentleman who wants to cease the suffering of rounds of rebirth (samsāra), must endeavour to know and see penetratively the Four Noble Truths because the suffering of rounds of rebirth can be ceased after knowing and seeing the Four Noble Truths penetratively.
 There is a question how to practise previously, in order to know and see the Four Noble Truths by nsight knowledge.
 It should be accepted seven stages of purification (visuddhi) as an essential practice for everyone.
 Only when accept like this, can a such meditator be agreeable answers for this question.

1.  Purify the virtue (sīla)
2.  Develop concentration (samādhi)
3.  Then, try to know the Four Noble Truths.

These are answers for above question.

Pāli Quotation (Mahāparinibbāna Sutta -D-2-77)

{{}}
{{}}
{{}}
the mind soaked in the wisdom, can escape well from  [[āsava|canker]]s.

{{}}
{{}}

Which kinds of [[āsava|canker]]s! These are the [[āsava|canker]] of sensual desire, (kāmāsava), of existence (bhavāsava) and of ignorance (avijjāsava).  (S-2-77).

If one escapes from [[āsava|canker]]s, he is able to escape from the suffering of rounds of rebirth.
 In order to ceases the suffering of rounds of rebirth, any one therefore, should ____

1.  develop the concentration socked in the virtue,
2.  meditate the wisdom soaked in the concentration.

Then the mind soaked in the wisdom, can escape well from [[āsava|canker]]s.
 In order to attain powerful mind, it should be soaked in the virtue, concentration and wisdom.
 When the virtue, concentration and wisdom become standard efficacy, the mind soaked in those virtue, concentration and wisdom become sharper and sharper than the thunderbolt of the king of deva (sakka).

It can be appeared the ability to eradicate all defilements.
 If every one wants to attain the most powerful mind, he has to fulfil three trainings, i.e. , virtue, concentration and wisdom respectfully.
 After purifying the virtue, the second training, the concentration must be fulfilled, at least up to access concentration.

 