## 3.1 Pāli Text of kāyānupassanā ānāpānapabba

**Pāli Quotation (M-1-70,71)**
***
PAGE-241
***
## 3.2 Translation of kāyānupassanā ānāpānapabba

bhikkhave = Bhikkhus… kathanca = how does bhikkhu = the practicing bhikkhu

viharati = stay kāyānupassī = through discerning as bodily constituents over and over kāye =
on the body?
idha = Under this Noble Admonishment, bhikkhave = bhikkhus….

Bhikkhu = the practicing bhikkhu araññagato vā = having gone to the forest or rukkhamūlagato vā = to the foot of a tree or suññāgāragato vā = to an empty, secluded place nisīdati = sits down pallankam ābujitvā = cross-legged, pa idhāya = keeping kāyam = upper part of body ujum = uprightly, upa hapetvā = and setting up satim = mindfulness, parimukham = towards the object of practice. So = That practicing bhikkhu assāsati =brings forth the in-breath satova = with outshining mindfulness only, passāsati = and brings forth the out-breath satova = with outshining mindfulness only.

Under this Noble Admonishment, bhikkhus…. the practicing bhikkhu having gone to
the forest or to the foot of a tree or to an empty, secluded place sits down cross-legged,

keeping upper part of body uprightly, and setting up mindfulness, towards the object of practice. That practicing bhikkhu brings forth the in-breath with outshining mindfulness
only, and brings forth the out-breath with outshining mindfulness only.

2. dīgham vā = when whatsoever long assāsanto = in-breath is brought forth pajānāti = it is conscious as “dīgham = long assasāmīti = in-breath occurs.”

dīgham vā = when whatsoever long passāsanto = out-breath is brought forth pajānāti = it is conscious as “dīgham = long passasāmīti = out-breath occurs.”

When whatsoever long in-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “long in-breath occurs.” When whatsoever long out-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “long out-breath

occurs.”

rassam vā = when whatsoever short assāsanto = in-breath is brought forth pajānāti = it is conscious as “rassam = short assasāmīti = in-breath occurs.”

rassam vā = when whatsoever shortg passāsanto = out-breath is brought forth pajānāti = it is conscious as “rassam = short passasāmīti = out-breath occurs.”

When whatsoever short in-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “short in-breath occurs.” When whatsoever short out-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “short out-breath occurs.”

sikkhati = He practices iti = in this way that “assasissāmi = the in-breath will be occurred subbakāya pa isamvedī = through keeping awareness on the beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.” sikkhati = He practices iti = in this way that “passasissāmi = the out-breath will be occurred subbakāya pa isamvedī = through keeping awareness on the

beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.”

sikkhati = He practices iti = in this way that “assasissāmi = the in-breath will be occurred passambhayam = through ceasing kāyasańkhāram = gross physical formation of in-breath and out-breath. sikkhati = He practices iti = in this way that “passasissāmi = the out-breath will be occurred passambhayam = through ceasing kāyasańkhāram = gross
physical formation of in-breath and out-breath.

He practices in this way that “the out-breath will be occurred through keeping awareness on the beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.” He practices in this way that “the in-breath will be occurred through keeping awareness on the beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.”

He practices in this way that “the in-breath will be occurred through ceasing gross physical formation of in-breath and out-breath. He practices in this way that “the out-breath will be occurred through ceasing gross physical formation of in-breath and out-breath.

3. seyyathāpi = In a worldly simile, bhikkhave = bhikkhus… dakkho = a skilful bhamakāro vā = turner or bhamakārantevāsī vā = a turner’s apprentice pajānāti = is conscious as “dīgham = long añchāmīti = pulling occurs”, dīgham vā = when whatsoever long añchanto = pulling is brought forth; pajānāti = he is conscious as “rassam = short añchamīti = pulling occurs” rassam vā = when whatsoever short añchanto = pulling is brought forth. evameva kho = Similarly bhikkhave = bhikkhus… bhikkhu = the practicing bhikkhu sikkhati =
practices… R….

In a worldly simile, bhikkhus… a skilful turner or - a turner’s apprentice is conscious

as “long pulling occurs”, when whatsoever long pulling is brought forth; he is conscious as “short pulling occurs” when whatsoever short pulling is brought forth. Similarly bhikkhus… the practicing bhikkhus practices… R….
***
PAGE-242
***
[Notes: Pāli Quotation (Pa isam-181) (Mahā ī-1-320)

According to these Pāli Text and explanation of Mahā īkā, the term, kāya, is translated as assāsapassāsakāya (= physical constituents of in-breath and out-breath),

rūpakāya (=physical constituents), nāmakāya (=mental constituents) from this place as beginning.]

4. iti = In this way viharati = he stays kāyānupassī = through repeated discerning as “kāya”, ajjhattam vā kāye = on whatsoever internal physical constituents or internal physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents; viharati = he stays kāyānupassī = through repeated discerning as “kāya, bahiddhā vā kāye = on

whatsoever external physical constituents or external physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents; viharati = he stays kāya-nupassī = through repeated discerning as “kāya” ajjhattabahiddhā vā kāye = on whatsoever internal external

physical constituents or internal external physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents.

In this way he stays through repeated discerning as kāya, on whatsoever internal physical constituents or internal physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents; he stays through repeated discerning kāya as on whatsoever external physical constituents or external physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents; he stays through repeated discerning as kāya on whatsoever internal external physical constituents or internal external physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents.

5. vihavati = He stays samudayadhammānupassī vā = through repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of arising and phenomenon of arising kāyasamim = of body or

physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents. vihavati = He stays vayadhammānupassī vā = through repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of cessation and phenomenon of cessation kāyasamim = of body or physical

constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents.

vihavati = He stays samudayavayadhammānupassī vā = through repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of arising and phenomenon of arising, phenomenon of origin of cessation and phenomenon of cessation kāyasamim = of body or physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents

He stays through repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of arising and phenomenon of arising of body or physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents. He stays through repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of cessation and phenomenon of cessation of body or physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents. He stays through repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of arising and phenomenon of arising, phenomenon of origin of cessation and phenomenon of cessation of body or physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents.

6. pana = Furthermore, atthi = there are kāyova = only body or only physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents. iti = In this way paccupa hitā = the manifestation of sati = mindfulness hoti = occurs assa = in the continuum of that practicing bhikkhu. sā sati = That mindfulness hoti = is yāvadeva
ñā amattāya = solely for advancement of vipassanā knowledge, yāvadeva pa issatimattāya

=solely for advancement of vipassanā mindfulness. Viharati = The practicing bhikkhu stays anissito ca = without attaching through craving, wrong view; na upādiyati = he never obsess as “ I, mine” kiñci = on any thing loke = in the world called five clinging aggregates. evampi kho = In this way also, bhikkhave = bhikkhus…. bhikkhu = the practicing bhikkhu

viharati = stays kāyānupassī = through repeated discerning as “kāya” kāye = on the body.

(M-1-70,71)
Furthermore, there are only body or only physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath,

physical constituents, mental constituents. In this way the manifestation of mindfulness occurs in the continuum of that practicing bhikkhu. That mindfulness is solely for advancement of vipassanā knowledge, solely for advancement of vipassanā mindfulness. The practicing bhikkhu stays without attaching through craving, wrong view he never obsess

as “ I, mine” on any thing in the world called five clinging aggregates. In this way also, bhikkhus…. the practicing bhikkhu stays through repeated discerning as “kāya” on the body.

(M-1-70, 71)
***
PAGE-243
***
In accordance with above preachings of the Supreme Buddha in this work called nibbānagāminipatipadā (=The Way of Practice Leading to nibbāna) the way of practice of

mindfulness of breathing will be presented in successive stages as follows
1. Section of ānāpānassatisamādhi,
2. Section of rūpakamma  hāna,
3. Section of nāmakamma  hāna,
4. Section of paticcasamuppāda,
5. Section of lakkha  ādicatukka,
6. Section of vipassanā practice.
***
PAGE-244
***