## 3.30 Five stages (pancasandhika)

The Exalted One preached this first tetrad of mindfulness of breathing by means of kāyānupassanā satipa hāna and samatha practice for beginner.
Remaining three kinds of tetrads were preached by means of vedananupassanā, cittānupassanā, dhammānupassanā respectively for those practicing persons who have got absorption through the first tetrad.

Therefore those gentlemen and ladies who want to reach the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant together with four kinds of Knowledge of Discrimination (pa isambhidā ñā a) through vipassanā knowledge which has proximate cause, the fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing, should like to perform basic functions, purifying morality etc.
, and they have to learn five stages of way of practice of mindfulness of breathing.
 (Vs-1-269)

1. Learning (uggaha)____ Learning of the meditation subject in Pāli is called uggaha.
 In the next method, learning of the meditation subject both in Pāli and meaning is called uggaha.

2. Questioning (paripucchā)____ Questioning on the meaning of meditation subject is called paripucchā.
In the next method, scrutinizing and questioning on some facts which are doubtful whether or not avoiding in meditation subject is called paripucchā.

3. Recognizing (upa  hāna)—— Recognizing on mode of appearance of signs in a way that “in this case, this kind of sign can appear in the continuum of person who develops practice of mindfulness of breathing in this way “etc., is called upa hāna.

4. Full absorption (appanā)—— Recognizing on mode of arising of full absorption in a way that “ this kind of absorption falls; it will be reached into full absorption in the continuum of person who develops practice of mindfulness of breathing in this way” etc., is called appanā.

5. Characteristic  (lakkha  ā)——  Recognizing  on  characteristics  of  practice  of mindfulness of breathing, such as, 
   - (a) the characteristic of completion with full absorption called hapanā which is resulting from capable of putting the mind of meditation on the object of sign of full concentration which arises depending on object of the in-breath-out-breath, in order to be stable and fixedly for long time when practice of mindfulness of breathing is performed through counting method, connexion method, touching method; and 
   - (b) the characteristic of way of reaching into the pinnacle called the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant, which arises through vipassanā knowledge which is called sallakkha ā, due to capable of distinguishing and discerning on nature of anicca, dukkha, anatta of conditioned things called assāsapassāsakāya (=physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath), rūpakāya (physical constituents of the whole body), nāmakāya (mental constituents), together with causal dhammas when vipassanā practice is transferred by making that absorption of mindfulness of breathing as fundamental of vipassanā etc., is called sallakkha ā.

***
PAGE-289
***
These are five stages called pañcasandhika which are worth learning previously for practicing persons who want to develop mindfulness of breathing.
 (Vs-1-270,Mahā ī-1-327)

Learning the practice of mindfulness of breathing with these five stages mentioned above, he neither tires himself nor worries the teacher.

Therefore in giving this meditation subject consisting in mindfulness of breathing attention he can live either with the teacher or elsewhere in an abode of any kind

- (1)in the forest,
- (2)at the foot of tree
- (3)at the empty place,

learning the practice of mindfulness of breathing with the five stages thus, getting a little expounded at a time and taking a long time over reciting it.
He should sever the minor impediments.
After finishing the work connected with the meal and getting rid of any dizziness due to the meal he should seat himself comfortably.
Then, making sure he is not confused about even a single word of what he has learned from the teacher, he should take into heart this practice of mindfulness of breathing through cheering his mind by recollecting the special qualities of the Triple Gems. (Vs-1-270)