## 3.31 Sequence of way of taking into heart
Pāli Quotation (Vs-1-270)
1. gaṇanā____ Counting the in-breath-out-breath is called gaṇanā.
2. anubandhanā—— Carrying on the mindfulness through continuous following to inbreaths and out-breaths after watching from touching place, resulting in connexion of mindfulness without interruption, is called anubandhanā.
3. phusanā—— Touching of the in-breath-out-breath on touching place called nose tip or tip of upper lip is called phusanā.
4. ṭhapanā—— Falling and fixing into the full absorption is called ṭhapanā.
The full absorption is called ṭhapanā, due to capable of putting mind of meditation fixedly on the object of sign of full concentration.
5. sallakkhaṇā—— Vipassanā knowledge is called sallakkhaṇā, due to capable of distinguishing and keeping in mind the nature of anicca-dukkha-anatta of conditioned things called assāsapassāsakāya, kārajakāya, nāmakāya together with causal dhammas.
***
PAGE-290
***
6. vivuṭṭanā—— Noble Path dhamma enters into the Unconditioned Element, Eternal Peace called nibbāna in a sudden burst of speed through emerging from both upādinnaka pavatta called apparent arising of resultant dhammas, due to obvious occurrence of causal dhammas and conditioned things.
During entering in that way, the Noble Path-Knowledge eradicates respective causal dhammas ignorance, craving, clinging etc., successively.
When the Path-Knowledge of Arahant is reached causal dhammas cease through absolute cessation called anuppādanirodha in which they never arise again.
Due to absolute cessation of causal dhammas, resultant dhammas also cease absolutely after final death of Arahant called parinibbānacuti.
The Noble Path dhamma is, therefore, called vivaṭṭanā, due to capable of sinking continuity of corporeality-mentality from upādinnakapavatta and sańkhāra nimitta (=emblem of conditioned things) and due to capable of ceasing cycling of rounds of rebirth.
7. pārisuddhi—— Noble Fruit-Knowledge is called parisuddhi (thorough purification), due to presence of nature of extinguishing of all kinds of impurities called defilements.
8. patipassanā—— Each kind of Receiving Knowledge which is capable of reviewing on the Path-Knowledge, Fruit-Knowledge, nibbāna, defilements which has be eradicated and defilements which has not been eradicated yet, is called paṭipassanā.
These are sequence of way of taking into heart for the person who performs practice of mindfulness of breathing.