## 3.32 Counting method (gaṇanā)
Among those (8) kinds of functions, the clansman and clanswoman who are beginners should take into heart this practice of mindfulness of breathing by counting.

**Pāli Quotation (Vs-1-270)**

And when counting, the practicing person should not stop short of five or go beyond ten or make any break in the series, such as one, three, five etc.
In other words, the practicing meditator has to try so as to be stable mindfulness on the object of inn-breath and out-breath without using counting method within two or three days.
If the mindfulness becomes stable on the object of in-breath and out-breath within two or three days, he has to practice in accordance with the first tetrad of practice of mindfulness of breathing, trying to know length or shortness of breathing etc., without counting.
Unless the mindfulness becomes stable on the object of in-breath and out-breath within two or three days, he has to apply counting method again.
During counting, he should not make any break in the series.
***
PAGE-291
***
By stopping short of five his thoughts get excited in the cramped space, like a herd of
cattle shut in a cramped pen.
Furthermore, by going beyond ten his thoughts take the number [rather than the breaths] for their support.
By making a break in the series he trembles, if the
practice has reached completion or not.
So he should do his counting without those faults
called stopping short of five, going beyond ten, making any break in the series.
(Vs-1-270)
### (a) Counting method of grain measurer
When he begins with counting method he should at first do it slowly as a grain
measurer does.
For a measurer having filled his measure, says ‘One’, and empties it, and then
refilling it, he goes on saying ‘One, One’ during removing any rubbish he may have noticed.

And the same with ‘Two, Two’, and so on.
So, taking the in-breath or the out-breath,
whichever appears, he should begin with ‘One, One’ and count up to “Ten, Ten, noting each
as it occurs, i.e.,
1. if the in-breath is obvious, noting the in-breath,
2. if the out-breath is obvious, noting the out-breath,
3. if both kinds of the in-breath and out-breath are obvious, noting both kinds.

As he does his counting in this way the in-breaths and out-breaths become obvious to him as they enter in and issue out.**(Vs-1-270)**

The essence of above explanation of commentary is as follows:

In both kinds of the in-breath and out-breath, the practising person with obvious inbreath should take the in-breath while the person with obvious out-breath should take the outbreath, the person with obvious both kinds, both kinds, and then he must count ‘One, One’,etc., before second in-breath or second out-breath or second both kinds of in-breath-outbreath.
It should be recognized similarly on counting as ‘Two, Two’ etc.
***
PAGE-292
***
Now it will be presented an example of way of counting of a person with obvious
both kinds.

1. the in-breath-out-breath – one-one-one……
2. the in-breath-out-breath – two-two-two….
3. the in-breath-out-breath – three-three-three….
4. the in-breath-out-breath – four-four-four….
5. the in-breath-out-breath – five-five-five….
6. the in-breath-out-breath – six-six-six….
7. the in-breath-out-breath – seven-seven-seven….
8. the in-breath-out-breath – eight-eight-eight….

When counting reaches to number “eight”, he has to start from ‘One’ again.
If he wants to count up to ‘Ten’, he can count as he likes.
But he must count without any break in the series.

This kind of counting method is not similar to quick reciting mantra which is done by parents when children fall down on the ground but as working the bellows which is done by silversmith.
It is designated as slow counting method of grain measurer (dandhagaṇanā dhaññamāpakagaṇanā) because the practicing bhikkhu counts slowly through considering on the in-breath as beginning but not the out-breath which is the beginning process for newly born babies.

### Pāli Quotation (Mahāṭī-1-328)
Those words, “in both kinds of the in-breath and out-breath obvious one should be taken and counting must be performed”, are said by commentary with referring to the practicing person who has got any kind of obvious one previously.
If both kinds of the inbreath and out-breath are obvious for such practicing person, that person should take both kinds of in-breath-out-breath and then he has to count one pair after another.
Because the term, yo upaṭṭhati (obvious breath), is said by commentary, in two kinds of out-breath which go out through two nostrils, the out-breath which goes out through such nostril becomes very obvious, such out-breath should be taken for counting.
It should be recognized that term, yo upaṭṭhati (=obvious breath), means practice of mindfulness of breathing should be performed through taking that kind of breath which is more obvious than the other for simultaneous occurring in two nostrils.
***
PAGE-293
***
Though any kind of in-breath and out-breath becomes obvious in the continuum of
meditator who counts as mentioned above, both kinds become obvious gradually, due to lack
of wandering of mind towards various external objects other than object of the in-breath-outbreath through counting method.
(Mahāṭī-1-328)
### b.Counting method of cowherd
At the beginning of practice of mindfulness of breathing the in-breath and out-breath are not obvious in the continuum of meditator, due to lack of purification of mind.
When impurities of mind called hindrances (nīvaraṇa) become clear in later the in-breaths and outbreaths are obvious and then the righteous meditator should count quickly as a cowherd does after leaving off counting method of a grain measurer.

For a skilled cowherd takes pebbles in his pocket and goes to the cow pen in the morning, whip in hand; sitting on the bar of the gate, prodding the cows in the back, he counts each one as it reaches the gate, saying ‘One, two,’ dropping a pebble for each.
And the cows of the herd, which have been spending the three watches of the night uncomfortably in
the cramped space, come out quickly in parties, jostling, each other as they escape.
So he counts quickly ‘three, four, five’ and so up to ten.

Similarly the righteous meditator should count the in-breaths and out-breaths quickly.

For the practicing bhikkhu who counts the in-breaths and out-breaths through slow counting method of grain measurer of quick counting method of cowherd the in-breaths and outbreaths become obvious and arise quickly over and over.
Afterwards, this practicing bhikkhu must count quickly as
- one, two, three, four, five, six, 
- or one, two, three, four, five, six, seven 
- or one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight
- or one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten etc.,by taking object of every pair of in-breath-out-breath which just reach at nostril but not interior or exterior of nose tip or tip of upper lip.
***
PAGE-294
***
It is right.
——_ In the practice of mindfulness of breathing which is concerning with counting the mind of meditation becomes concentrated through efficiency of counting only.
It should be recognized it is similar to the fact the boat can be stopped in water flowing which
flows very swiftly through the efficiency of supporting factor of punting pole.
(Vs-1-271)
### c.How the practice can be fulfilled
Thus the practice of mindfulness of breathing called the in-breaths and out-breaths become apparent to that practicing person who counts quickly as an uninterrupted process.

[Notes:—— In this case, the usage, “ as an uninterrupted process”, but not “uninterruptedly”, is said because uninterrupted process can occur within full absorption cognitive process called ṭhapanā only.
During performing counting method minds of meditation which discern the in-breath-out-breath are only continuity of great wholesome impulsions of mind-door cognitive processes in sensual sphere for worldling and fulfilling persons (sekkha).
In this case, that cognitive process consists of one adverting consciousness and (7) times of impulsions, due to taking object of concept called the in-breath and outbreath.
Those mind-door cognitive processes are separated by life-continuums which takes any kind of three objects, action-emblem of action-emblem of destination (kammakammanimitta-gatinimitta) which were objects of impulsions adjacent to death of previous life.
Therefore, the usage, “as an uninterrupted process” is applied without saying uninterrupted process, due to occurrence of objects taken by life-continuum is not the inbreath-out-breath.
It refers only most occurrence of cognitive processes and less occurrence of life-continuums.]

Then, knowing that it is proceeding uninterruptedly, he can count quickly (early in the way just described, not discerning the wind either inside or outside the nostril).
For by bringing his consciousness inside along with the inhaling breath it seems as if it were buffetted by the wind inside or filled with fat.
By taking his consciousness outside along with the exhaling breath it gets distracted by the multiplicity of external objects.
However, his practice of mindfulness of breathing can be fulfilled when he fixes his mindfulness on the place touched by the breaths.
That is why it was said above ‘He can count quickly (early in the way just described, not discerning the wind either inside or outside the nostril).**(Vs-1-271)**
***
PAGE-295
***
### d.How much does it take to count?
The period how much it takes to count is that—— the mindfulness is stable on the object of the in-breath and out-breath without counting throughout such period, he has to count throughout that period.
It is because the counting method is performed with intended to attain advantage of the stability of mindfulness on the objects of the in-breaths and outbreaths through severing initial applications on various external objects, other than the inbreath-out-breath.(Vs-1-271)

When the mindfulness becomes stable on object of the in-breath-out-breath through counting method the practicing person has to endeavour the way of practice that knowing the length and shortness of breathing which is found in the first tetrad of **Pāli** Text.