Vol 2, pg 153-200.doc 

***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**SECTION OF *NĀAMAKAMMAṭṭHĀNA*** 

(**PRACTICE ON MENTALITY**) **VOLUME II**  

**Page 153 - 200** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**&** 

**Dr. Khin Maung Aye (Ph.D, Messey)** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiṭakadhara*)** 

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE-153** 

Five-doors-adverting, seeing-consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, (7) times of impulsions, (2) times of registering, after wards life-continuums fall many times and mind-door-adverting, (7) times of impulsions, (2) times of registering etc., 

During keeping in mind mental ***dhammas*** in that way he has to practise in order to understand arising of numerous mind-door-cognitive processes after one time of eye-door- cognitive process but separated by many times of life-continuums. 

When he is mastery in discerning consciousness only he has to continue to discern synchronous arising of consciousness and contact called ***phassa*** within same mind moment. After wards he has to discern in order to see synchronous arising of all mental ***dhammas*** within every mind moment of both kinds of cognitive processes as shown in table, through gradual  increment  of  mental  ***dhammas***  which  can  be  kept  in  mind  clearly.  He  will  be successful gradually. If should be recognized similarly on way of discerning through contact as beginning, way of discerning through feeling as beginning. If it is not successful, only corporeal ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind over and over again. It is explained in ***Visuddhi Magga*** (***Vs*-2-225**) that mental ***dhammas*** will be apparent automatically. 

**8.B Real and non-real corporealities must be discerned minglingly** 

Among  those  consciousness  of  cognitive  processes,  seeing-consciousness  arises depending  on  eye-base  called  eye-transparent-element  while  remaining  all  consciousness arise depending on heart-base only. Therefore depended base are also shown in table so as to attain advantages in keeping corporeality-mentality in mind and in distinguishing, analyzing corporeality-mentality.  In  the  aspect  of  ***Abhidhamma***,  the  term,  ***vatthu***  (=base),  must  be inferred pure base, eye-base, heart-base etc., only. However in the aspect of ***Suttanta***, the term, ***vatthu*** (=base), must be inferred not only pure base, eye-base, heart-base etc, but also underived and derived corporealities which are synchronous arising together with those eye- base,  heart-base  etc.,  within  the  same  corporeal  unit.  Those  underived  and  derived corporealities must also be kept in mind. In the aspect of ***Suttanta***, it is practical and all ultimate  nature  must  be  essential  to  be  reached  by  insight  by  breaking  down  each compactness of corporeality and mentality. 

Therefore way of inferring on the term, ***vatthu***, in the aspect of ***sulttanta***, is explained in olden day commentaries and sub-commentaries. 

**PAGE-154** 

(54) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

(54) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** are shown in tables. Seeing consciousness arises depending  on  eye-base  while  remaining  all  consciousness  which  take  visible-object  arise depending on heart-base only. 

Furthermore it is impossible to arise any kind of ultimate nature, either eye-base or heart-base.  Every  corporeality  arise  group  wise  system  called  corporeal  unit.  Only  when those corporeal units can be analyzed upto the field of ultimate nature compactness called ***ghana*** can be broken down and vice versa. 

After keeping mental ***dhammas*** in mind the righteous ***meditator*** has to keep corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind again. During repeated keeping corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind again, the facts relating to which kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** are essential to be kept in mind are instructed in commentaries as follows : \_\_\_\_\_ 

**8.D The basic meaning of the ter5m, *vatthu* (=base)** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-252, 253; Dī-A-2-314-315; M-A-1-281)*** 

 ***(Mūlaṭī-2-157) (Anuṭī-2-157)*** 

The essence of above commentaries, sub-commentaries is as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

After the parctising person who has finished to keep corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind upto the field of ultimate nature, has finished to distinguish and keep in mind mental ***dhammas*** which are led by ***phassapañcamaka*** ***dhamma*** (***dhammas*** with contact as fifth factor) \_\_\_\_\_ 

When he scrutinize in such way that 

“how do these mental ***dhammas*** which are led by ***phassapañcamaka*** ***dhamma*** arise depending on which ***dhamma***?" ….. 

he distinguishes that these mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on base-corporeality. Base corporeality means ***karajakāya*** really. With referring to that base corporeality called ***karajakāya*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

the Exalted one preached in ***Sāmaññaphala Sutta*** (***Dī-1-72***), ***Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta*** (***M-2-209***), that \_\_\_\_\_ 

“this  consciousness  of  mine  depends  on  this ***karajakāya***;  it  arises  relating  to  this ***karajakāya*** (=bodily constituents)".  

**PAGE-155** 

That ***karajakāya*** means underived corporealities called four great elements and (24) kinds of derived corporealities which arise depending on those four great elements. (***Abhi-A- 2-252, 253; Dī-A-2-314, 315; M-A-1-281***) 

Because ***nāma rūpavavatthāna ñāṇa*** which is the factor of knowing each ultimate nature of mentality-materiality discriminately, is worth desiring, \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

So as to instruct the fact all corporeal ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind thoroughly \_\_\_ the commentator ***Sayādaw*** said that \_\_\_\_\_ 

“***vatthu nāma karajakāyo*** = the base corporeality means bodily constituents”.  

Commentator ***Sayādaw*** does not refer to (6) kinds of bases called eye-base, ear-base, nose-base, tongue-base, body-base, heart-base. 

So  as  to  finish  the  basic  meaning  of  base-corporeality  as  underived  and  derived corporealities  called  ***karajakāya,***  he  shows  the  reference  found  in  ***Sāmaññaphala  Sutta***, ***Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta*** that \_\_\_\_\_ 

“***idañca pana me viññāṇam ettha sitam; ettha paṭibaddham*** = this consciousness of mine depends on this ***karaja-kāya***; it arises relating to this ***kara-jakāya***.” (***Mūlaṭī-2-157***) 

***Mūlaṭīkā Sayādaw*** who wants to show apparently the meaning which is rejected by those words, “base-corporeality means ***kārajakāya”***, explained that “in this case only (6) kinds of bases, eye-base etc., are not intended to be said as base corporealities”. Two bundles of reeds are stood by mutual depending on each other. As two bundles of reeds are relying on each other \_\_\_\_\_ 

similarly it should be recognized these words, “ in this case only (6) kinds of bases, eye-base etc.,  are  not  intended  to  be  said  as  base  corporealities”,  show  not  only  presence  of relationship of ***nāmakāya*** with ***rūpakāya*** but also benefitting of ***rūpakāya*** on ***nāmakāya*** through efficiency of relation of dependence (***nissayapaccaya***). (***Anuṭī-2-157***) 

In the aspect of ***Abhidhamma niddesa*** method \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. seeing-consciousness together with associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on eye-base only. 
1. hearing-consciousness together with associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on ear-base only. 
1. smelling-consciousness together with associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on nose-base only. 
1. tasting-consciousness together with associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on tongue-base only. 
1. touching-consciousness together with associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on body-base only. 
1. mind-consciousness together with associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on heart-base only. 

**PAGE-156** 

Therefore in the aspect of preaching methodology of ***Abhidhamma niddesa***, only (6) kinds of bases, eye-base etc., can be designated as base-corporeality (***vatthurūpa***), due to occurrence  of  depended  corporealities  of  (6)  kinds  of  consciousness  element,  seeing- consciousness etc., together with associating mental ***dhammas***. 

However in the aspect of preaching methodology of ***Suttanta pariyāya*** (= peripharisis method) \_\_\_ according to the term, ***vatthu***, one should not inferred on only (6) kinds of bases, eye-base etc., as basic meaning but on each base-corporeality, those eye-base etc., and all kinds of underived  and derived corporealities called ***kārajakāya***,  which are occurring within the same corporeal unit respectively. Therefore (54,44 kinds etc.) of corporealities must be inferred. 

***Suttantanaya***  is  practical  way  of  preaching  methodology.  During  keeping corporeality-mentality,  in  mind  the  practising  person  must  try  to  break  down  each compactness of corporeality, mentality so as to reach the field of ultimate nature. Corporeal units are the smallest system in the aspect of conventional reality. Only when one can break down those masses of corporealities and mentalities by insight, can he reach into the field of ultimate  nature  by  insight.  Every  corporeal  unit  consists  of  underived  and  derived corporealities. For instance \_\_\_ only when a person who wants to keep eye-base in mind can distinguish (10) kinds of corporealisties within eye-decad, can he realize eye-transparent- element  called  eye-base  really.  Therefore,  in  the  aspect  of  preaching  methodology  of ***Suttanta***, (54-44 kinds etc.) of depended corporealities are shown in tables. However the righteous ***meditator*** has to keep both real and non-real corporealities in mind minglingly in the  stage  of  Knowledge  of  Analyzing  Mentality-Corporeality.  When  he  reaches  into ***vipassanā*** stage only real corporealities must be discerned. Only real corporealities are shown in tables as priority. 

***8.E Life-continuum must be noticed*** 

In these tables it is shown that numerous times of life-continuums separate between eye-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door-cognitive  process  each  interval  of  mind-door- cognitive processes. With referring to the person who has got ***paṭisandhi*** with three roots and agreeable  feeling  it  is  shown  (34)  mental  ***dhammas***  in  life-continuum.  If  the  righteous ***meditator*** has got ***paṭisandhi*** with three roots and neutrality feeling, life-continuum consists of (33) mental ***dhammas***, due to lack of pleasurable interest called ***pīti***. For those persons with two roots etc., mental ***dhammas*** of life-continuum might be (33-32) etc., appropriately. That life-continuum takes any kind of three objects called action emblem of action emblem of destination, which was object of impulsions adjacent to death of previous life. Generally most practising persons can discern object of impulsions adjacent to death of previous life in the stage  of  Knowledge  of  Discerning  Cause  and  Condition  systematically,  resulting  in understanding on life-continuum properly. Only when the life-continuum can be discerned properly consciousness of life-continuum and associating mental ***dhammas*** can be discerned properly. Therefore during discerning mental ***dhammas*** as beginning mental ***dhammas*** of life-continuum can be omitted temporarily without discerning. 

**PAGE-157** 

Those two kinds of knowledge, knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality and Knowledge  of  Discerning  Cause  and  condition  can  not  be  accomplished  through  once discerning but over and over again, resulting in designation as ***anubodha ñāṇa*** (=repeated discerning knowledge). (***see Dī-ṭī-2-89,90***) 

**8.F. Wise-attention (*yoniso manasikāra*)** 

1. If visible-object (=colour) is discerned as visible-object (= colour), eye-door-cognitive process  and  numerous  mind-door-cognitive  process  which  know  visible-object continuously will arise. (Way of discerning has been presented.) Then \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as corporeal ***dhamma***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process which know it as corporeal ***dhamma***; 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as ***anicca***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door- cognitive process which know it as ***anicca***; 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as ***dukkha***, continuity of consciousness of mind- door-cognitive process which know it as ***dukkha***; 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as ***anatta***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door- cognitive process which know it as ***anatta***; 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as ***a-subha***, continuity of consciousness of mind- door-cognitive process which know it as ***a-subha***; will arise respectively. 

Those various consciousness of mind-door-cognitive processes must be discerned in order  to  see  ultimate  nature  of  each  mental  ***dhamma***  through  breaking  down  each compactness of mentality called masses of mentality. 

[**Notes:** \_\_\_\_\_ In this case the reason why that visible-object is shown as repeatedly is due to same occurrence as visible-object in accordance with ***ekattanaya***. It does not mean single visible-object  within  a  corporeal  unit  must be  discerned  as  (6)  times  in  that  way before completion of (17) mind moments. It should be recognized the same kind of visible-objects must be discerned over and over.] 

**8.G. The reason why it is discerned through (6) ways** 

According  to  explanations  found  in  ***Pāli***  Text  called  ***Vibhanga  (Abhi-2-323)***  and commentary (***Abhi-A-2-388***), visible-object (= colour) can be realized as visible-object (= colour) only by consciousness of eye-door-cognitive process. Those consciousness of eye- door-cognitive process can not realize that visible-object (= colour) either  

1. as corporeal ***dhamma***, or 

**PAGE-158** 

2. as ***anicca*** ***dhamma*** or 
3. as ***dukkha*** ***dhamma*** or 
3. as ***anatta*** ***dhamma*** or 
3. as ***a-subha*** ***dhamma***. 

Similarly  remaining  five-doors-cognitive  processes,  ear-door-cognitive  process,  can realize respective objects, audible-object etc., only but not realizing 

1. as corporeal ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***anicca*** ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***dukkha*** ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***anatta*** ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***a-subha*** ***dhamma*** . 

Those  consciousness  of  mind-door-cognitive  processes  which  take  visible-object continuously can realize that visible-object either 

1. as visible-object (=clolour) or 
1. as corporeal ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***anicca*** ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***dukkha*** ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***anatta*** ***dhamma*** or 
1. as ***a-subha*** ***dhamma*** respectively. 

Those  consciousness  of  mind-door-cognitive  processes  which  take  either  audible- object or olfactory-object or sapid-object or tactile-object continuously can realize respective objects in similar way. 

Firstly  the  reason  why  each  corporeal  element  is  discerned  through  (6)  ways  is intended  to  be  understood  how  wholesome  impulsions  fall  if  wise  attention  performs properly. 

Second \_\_\_\_\_ when one reaches into ***vipassanā*** stage it is instructed in ***Visuddhi Magga***  in  ***arūpasattakanaya***  (non-corporeal  septad  method)  that  preceding  ***vipassanā*** impulsions of cognitive process must be discerned by succeeding ***vipassanā*** impulsions of cognitive process again.  When one reaches into later stage of  Knowledge of Dissolution (***bhanga ñāṇa***) also \_\_\_\_\_ it is instructed that \_\_\_\_\_ 

***ñātañca ñāṇañca ubhopi vipassati. (Vs-2-278)*** 

- both conditioned things which are worth knowing by ***vipassanā*** knowledge, which 

are  called  ***ñāta***  and  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  called  ***ñāṇa***  must  be  discerned  as  object  of ***vipassanā*** practice. 

**PAGE-159** 

Therefore it is preliminary preparation for ability to discern both ***ñāta*** and ***ñāṇa***. 

Due to these two reasons, it should be recognized mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking each corporeal element are discerned through (6) ways. There are (6x4=24) 24 ways in total. In this case because this is only the stage of  knowledge of Analyzying  Mentality- Corporeality,  registering  can  fall,  resulting  in  showing  registering  after  great  wholesome impulsions of cognitive process. However depending on obvious or unobvious occurrence of objects, it can fall or not appropriately. 

**8.H. Further explanations** 

***pañcadvārāvajjana*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

In  five-door-adverting  mind  moment  (11)  kinds  of  consciousness  and  mental concomitants are fixed number. It always associate with neutrality feeling. 

***cakkhuviññāṇa*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

In  seeing-consciousness  mind  moment  (8)  kinds  of  consciousness  and  mental concomitants are fixed number. It always associate with neutrality feeling. 

***sampaṭicchana*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

In receiving mind moment (11) kinds of consciousness and mental concomitants are fixed number. It always associate with neutrality feeling. 

***santīraṇa*** 

In investigating mind moment if it associates with agreeable feeling, (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** will be included, due to presence of pleasurable interest. In second and fourth  rows  it  associates  with  neutrality  feeling  (11)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  will  be included, due to lack of pleasurable interest. 

***vuṭṭho*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

In determining mind moment (12) kinds of consciousness and mental concomitants are fixed number. It always associate with neutrality feeling. 

***javana*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

In impulsion mind moment (34) consciousness and mental concomitants means (34) mental ***dhammas*** of faith-wisdom group. 

1. If it associates with both ***ñāṇa*** and ***pīti***, there are (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas***; it associates with agreeable feeling; 
1. If it associates with ***ñāṇa*** but not ***pīti***, there are (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas***; it associates with neutrality feeling; 
1. If it dissociates from ***ñāṇa*** but not ***pīti***, there are (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas***; it associates with agreeable feeling; 
1. If it dissociates from both ***ñāṇa*** and ***pīti***, there are (32) kinds of mental ***dhammas***; it associates with neutrality feeling. 

***tad-ārammaṇa*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

If should be recognized on registering mind moment as four facts found in impulsion. 

***manodvārāvajjana*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

The mind-door-adverting mind moment is similar to determining mind moment. It always associates with neutrality feeling. 

**PAGE-160** 

**8.I. Factors of falling of great wholesome impulsions** 

Explanations  relating  to  factors  of  falling  of  great  wholesome  impulsions  can  be found in the commentary called ***Aṭṭhasālinī (Abhi-A-1-117)*** etc., in detailed. Here it will be presented essence of explanations. \_\_\_\_\_ 

Among those (6) kinds of objects, previously those great wholesome impulsions arise by taking visible-object of any kind of comely colours, i.e., brown, golden red, white flowers, clothes, realgar brownish jasper etc., which are factors of taking as pleasingness, which are desirable and proliferable of the mind. 

There is a reasonable question in this case. Due to occurrence of desirable and comely emblem  of  pleasingness,  is  this  desirable  object  basis  of  greed?  Why  wholesome consciousness can arise by taking this desirable object? The answer is as follows : \_\_\_\_\_ Due to these four factors, viz.,  

1. ***niyamitavasena*** \_\_\_\_\_ due to efficiency of mind which is fixedly determined forever in performing wholesome deeds; 
1. ***pariṇāmitavasena*** \_\_\_\_\_ due to efficiency of mind which is inclined, bent towards performing wholesome deeds; 
1. ***samudācāravasena*** \_\_\_\_\_ due to efficiency of mind which has been well practiced and experienced previously in performing wholesome deeds; 
1. ***ābhujitavasena*** \_\_\_\_\_ due to efficiency of way of taking into heart so as to arise wholesome deeds, 

the consciousness which takes these desirable objects become wholesome one. 

1. ***niyamita***\_\_\_\_\_ In continuum of such person a way of fixedly determination that “ I am deserving to do wholesome consciousness only, whatever kind of object might be encountered, wholesome consciousness must be arisen in my continuum”, is always made a decision. In continuum of that person wholesome consciousness always arises. 
1. ***pariṇāmita***\_\_\_\_\_ In the continuum of a person who always inclines his mind so as to arise wholesome deed through restraining one’s mind so as not to arise unwholesome deed also wholesome consciousness only usually arises. 
1. ***samudācāra***\_\_\_\_\_ The mind is well practiced previously so as to become wholesome consciousness  through  well  accomplishment  of  experienced  wholesome  deed previously. In the continuum of a person who has got well practice of wholesome consciousness  only  wholesome  consciousness  usually  arises;  only  wholesome consciousness arises frequently. 

**PAGE-161** 

4. ***ābhujita***\_\_\_\_\_ Due to presence of efficiency of relation of powerful determinative dependence such as \_\_\_\_\_ 
1) ***patirūpadesavāsa*** = dwelling in suitable place where is blessed with triple gems and virtuous persons so as to be available wholesome deed, 
1) ***sappurisūpanissaya***\_\_\_ availability to approach virtuous persons, 
1) ***saddhammassavana***\_\_\_ availability to listen virtuous person’s ***dhammas***, 
1) ***pubbe  katapuññatā***\_\_\_  acquired  wholesome  deeds  in  previous  lives,  in  the continuum of a person who usually takes into heart properly, who has got ***ābhujita***  

`      `(= wise attention) wholesome consciousness only arises.  

Due to these four factors, greedy mind does not arise but wholesome consciousness arise although emblem of pleasingness, desirable object is encountered. ***(Abhi-A-1-117)*** 

These explanations are invaluable ***dhamma*** gifts which is better than excellent ruby gem for the righteous person who is trying to arise unexperienced wholesome deeds and to proliferate experienced wholesome deeds. 

**8.K. Efficiency of *pubbe katapuññatā*** 

It will be explained significance of efficiency of ***pubbe katapuññatā*** continuously as follows : \_\_\_\_\_ 

The term, ***pubbe katapuññatā*** means fertile seed of knowledge and fertile seed of practice  which  had  been  well  cultivated  in  various  lives  for  attainment  of  eternal  peace element,  ***nibbāna***,  which  is  the  object  of  various  kinds  of  Enlightenments  (***bodhiñāṇa***), namely,  

1. ***sammāsambodhi ñāṇa*** = Perfectly self-Enlightened One’s Enlightenment, 
1. ***paccekabodhi ñāṇa*** = Lesser Buddha’s Enlightenment, 
1. ***agga sāvakabodhi ñāṇa*** = Supreme most Disciple’s Enlightenment, 
1. ***mahā sāvakabodhi ñāṇa*** = Great Disciple’s Enlightenment, 
1. ***pakati sāvakabodhi ñāṇa*** = Ordinary Disciple’s Enlightenment. 

**PAGE-162** 

Three kinds of ***vijjā*** (knowledge) 

These three kinds of knowledge 

1. ***pubbenivāsānussati  ñāṇa***  =  the  super-psychic  knowledge  which  is  capable  of recollecting continuity of experienced aggregates in previous lives, 
1. ***dibbacakkhu  ñāṇa***  =  the  super-psychic  knowledge  called  Divine  Eye  which  is capable of seeing all near and far things as divine eye, 
1. ***āsavakkhaya ñāṇa*** = the Path-Knowledge of Arahant which knows and sees ***nibbāna*** which is extinguishment of (4) kinds of taint ***dhammas*** called ***āsava*** ***dhamma***, are called (3) kinds of ***vijjā*** (knowledge), preached by the Exalted One in ***Bhayabherava Sutta (M-1-26)***. 

**Eight kinds of *vijjā* (knowledge)** 

Furthermore  eight  kinds  of  ***vijjā***  are  also  preached  in  ***Ambaṭṭha  sutta***  (***Dī***-***1-94***), namely \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. ***iddhividha ñāṇa*** = the super-psychic knowledge which can create various kinds of miraculous power, such as going under ground, flying in the sky etc., 
1. ***dibbasota ñāṇa*** = the super-psychic knowledge which is capable of hearing whatever sound of human and heavenly beings which is either near or far as Divine Ear, 
1. ***cetopariya ñāṇa*** = the super-psychic knowledge which is capable of knowing other’s mind 
1. ***pubbenivāsānussati  ñāṇa***  =  the  super-psychic  knowledge  which  is  capable  of recollecting continuity of experienced aggregates in previous lives, 
1. ***dibbacakkhu  ñāṇa***  =  the  super-psychic  knowledge  called  Divine  Eye  which  is capable of seeing all near and far things as divine eye, 
1. ***āsavakkhaya ñāṇa*** = the Path-Knowledge of Arahant which knows and sees ***nibbāna*** which is extinguishment of (4) kinds of taint ***dhammas*** called ***āsava*** ***dhamma***, 
1. ***vipassanā ñāṇa*** = it is called ***dhammaṭhitiñāṇa*** which lies well on the phenomena of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta*** of conditioned things called ***dukkhasacca***, ***samudayasacca***, 
1. ***manomayiddhi ñāṇa*** = the super-psychic knowledge which is capable of creating numerous bodies with mind. 

The Exalted One preached in different ways depending on individual preference of beings who listen various kinds of discourses. 

(15) kinds of ***caraṇa*** (practices) 

1. ***sīlasamvara*** = restraining with morality, 
2. ***indriyesu  guttadvāratā***  =  restraining  in  (6)  kinds  of  doors  called  eye,  ear,  nose, tongue, body, mind so as not to enter impurities of defilements, selfish desire, anger, delusion etc, through permanent taking into heart any object of meditation subjects, called ***samatha*** practice, ***vipassanā*** practice, 
2. ***bhojane mattaññutā*** = understanding on balanced diet 

**PAGE-163** 

4. ***jāgariyānuyoga*** = presence of vigilance (sleeping in only one part of three phases of night, i.e, night fall, midnight and dawn) 

5-11.  ***satta***  ***saddhamma***  =  Virtuous  person’s  (7)  ***dhammas***  called  faith,  conscience, 

shame, general knowledge, diligence, mindfulness, wisdom,  

12-15. Four kinds of fine material absorptions called First absorption, Second absorption, 

Third absorption, Fourth absorption, in the aspect of tetrad method, 

there are (15) kinds of practices (***caraṇa dhamma***) in total. 

***Satta saddhamma*** = (7) kinds of virtuous person’s ***dhammas*** 

1. ***saddhā*** (faith) = firm faith on bases which are deserving to be faithful, triple gems, action consequence of action etc., 
1. ***hirī*** (conscience) = It has conscientious scruples (hiriyati) about bodily misconduct etc., 
1. ***ottappa*** (shame) = It has dreadfulness about bodily misconduct etc., 
1. ***bāhusacca*** = general knowledge = presence of knowledge gained through learning and knowledge gained through practice on principle of aggregates, bases, elements, truths, dependent-origination, which are inclusive in (37) factors of associations of Enlightenment  (***bodhipakkhiya  dhamma***),  which  are  essence  of  three  baskets preached by Exalted One, 

[The knowledge gained through learning from teacher is called ***āgamasuta*** or hearing knowledge, due to occurrence of knowledge by means of hearing. The knowledge gained through  practice,  in  accordance  with  knowledge  gained  through  learning,  is  called ***adhigamasuta*** or insight knowledge, due to occurrence of experiential penetrative knowledge by means of practice of himself. 

Thus ***bāhusacca*** can be translated into hearing and insight knowledge by olden day noble teachers. In the aspect of order of knowledge ***bāhusacca*** means the knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality and the Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition. Please see explanations found in ***Pāli*** Text and commentary as follows.] \_\_\_\_ 

***bahussuta*** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Ang-2-399) (Ang-A-2-364)*** 

***Bhikkhus*** … under this admonishment Noble disciple (the next method, my disciple who is Noble One) has got plenty of ***bahussuta***, he keeps with ***bahussuta***; he acquires ***bahussuta***; that person has experience to listen, keep, memorize, bear in mind over and over again, ***dhammas*** which are completed with noble of three parts, beginning, middle, end, which are blessed with meaning and rules of grammer, which are thoroughly purified, due to lack of rejecting or adding anymore, which are capable of expressing thorough purified practice. He knows  and  sees  penetratively  on  those  ***dhammas***  by  experiential  right  view  knowledge. ***Bhikkhus*** … this can be said as ***sutadhana*** (= wealth of hearing and insight knowledge). ***(Ang-2-399)*** 

Commentary  explained  that  the  term,  ***diṭṭhiyā  suppaṭividdhā***,  means  penetrative knowing and seeing on The Blessed One’s ***dhammas*** by means of both 

1) ***attha*** = basic meaning and 
1) ***kāraṇa*** = causal ***dhamma*** with the help of experiential right view knowledge. 

***attha***  =  Among  there  are  (4)  kinds  of  ultimate  ***dhammas***  called  consciousness,  mental concomitant,  corporeality,  ***nibbāna***,  in  this  case,  consciousness,  mental  concomitants, corporeality,  which  are  discerned  object  of  ***vipassanā***  knowledge,  are  meant  as  ***attha*** (=results). In the aspect of preaching methodology of truths, those consciousness, mental concomitants  and  corporeality  are,  actually,  ***dukkha***  ***sacca***  ***dhammas***,  five  clinging aggregates which are existing in (11) kinds of situations called past, future, present, internal, external etc. 

***kāraṇa*** = Those causal ***dhammas*** called ***samudayasacca*** are designated as ***kāraṇa***. 

Here  the  knowledge  which  is  capable  of  penetrative  knowing  and  seeing  on ***dukkhasacca***  is  called  the  knowledge  of  Analyzing  Mentality-Corporeality  while  the knowledge which is capable of penetrative knowing and seeing on ***samudayasacca***, is called the knowledge of Discerning cause and condition. The person who has got those two kinds of knowledge can be said as the person with ***bahussuta***. ***(Ang-2-399, Ang-A-2-364)*** 

5.***vīriya*** (= diligence) 

Strenuou8s diligence with these four kinds of factors, 

1. may bones be remain, \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. may skin be remain, \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. may organ like line of streak be remain, \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. may all flesh and blood be dry up, \_\_\_\_\_ 

strenuous diligence must not fall back 

1) so as not to arise unexperienced unwholesome ***dhammas***, 
1) so as to remove experienced unwholesome ***dhammas***, 
1) so as to arise unexperienced wholesome ***dhammas***, 
1) so as to proliferate experienced wholesome ***dhammas***, 

is called ***sammappadhama vīriya*** (= strenuous diligence). 

6.***sati***  (mindfulness) \_\_\_\_\_  It  is  the  nature  of  unforgetfulness  on  (4)  kinds  of  objects  of foundation of mindfulness, called ***kāya***, ***vedanā***, ***citta***, ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE -165** 

\7.  ***paññā*** (wisdom) \_\_\_\_\_ ***vipassanā*** knowledge together with the knowledge of Arising and Passing Away which is capable of breaking down bulk of defilements called mass of selfish desire, mass of anger, mass of delusion; which has full of efficiency to reach ***nibbāna*** which is extinguishment of suffering of rounds of rebirth; which is penetrative knowing and seeing on phenomenon of ***anicca***, phenomenon of ***dukkha***, phenomenon of ***anatta*** of conditioned things called ***kāya***, ***vedanā***, ***citta***, ***dhamma***, is called ***paññā***. 

These (7) kinds of ***dhammas*** are virtuous person’s ***dhammas***. In these (8) kinds of ***vijjā***  and  (15)  kinds  of  ***caraṇa***,  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  is  a  ***dhamma***  with  both  kinds  of designations, ***vijja***, ***caraṇa***. Those ***vipassanā*** actions which can give rise to occur ***paṭisandhi*** consequence are inclusive in seed of practice (***caraṇa***) while those ***vipassanā*** knowledge which can not give rise to occur ***paṭisandhi*** consequence are inclusive in seed of knowledge (***vijjā***).  Seed  of  practice  is  similar  to  hand  and  foot,  while  seed  of  knowledge,  eye respectively. Only when both kinds of seed of practice and seed of knowledge are completed can one reach into ***nibbāna***. 

Those fertile seed of practice and fertile seed of knowledge are ***pubbe katapuññatā*** (= acquired wholesome deeds in previous lies). Only when factor of that ***pubbe*** ***katapuññatā*** is available as supporting factor ***pactirūpa*** ***desavāsa***, ***sappūrisūpanissaya***, ***saddhammassavana*** can  arise  consequently.  Only  when  those  benefiting  of  four  factors  are  available  wise attention  can  arise  on  whatever  object,  resulting  in  frequent  arising  of  wholesome consciousness. Therefore every person who wants to liberate from suffering of rounds of rebirth  has  to  cultivate  fertile  seed  of  knowledge,  fertile  seed  of  practice  called  charity, morality, ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practice with strenuous diligence during day and night continuously. (***See Abhi-A-117, Mūlaṭī-1-70)*** 

**8.L. Causal *dhammas* of arising of agreeable feeling** 

There are (4) kinds of great wholesome consciousness with agreeable feeling and (4) kinds of great wholesome consciousness with neutrality feeling, totally in (8) kinds. It should be recognized due to efficiency of object, this great wholesome consciousness associates with agreeable  feeling.  It  is  right. \_\_\_\_\_  When  this  great  wholesome  consciousness  arises by taking  desirable  object,  this  (first)  great  wholesome  consciousness  arises  together  with agreeable feeling, due to occurrence through taking desirable-object. 

Occurrence of the person with great firm faith, etc., are causal ***dhammas*** for arising of this  great  wholesome  consciousness  which  associates  with  agreeable  feeling.  It  will  be explicit.  \_\_\_  In  the  continuum  of  either  the  person  who  lacks  faith  on  bases  which  are deserving to be faithful or the person with wrong view agreeable feeling can not arise by seeing the excellent desirable object of even though the appearance of the Exalted One who is called ***tathāgata***. Furthermore \_\_\_ such persons do not understand advantage of arising of wholesome  deeds;  even  though  those  persons  do  wholesome  deed,  due  to  presence  of prompted mind by others the agreeable feeling does not arise apparently in the continuum of those persons. Therefore \_\_\_ due to presence of these causal ***dhammas*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. occurrence of very desirable-object,  
1. occurrence of the person with firm faith, 
1. occurrence of the person with purified right view 
1. occurrence of the person who has got well understanding on advantages of wholesome deeds, 

during arising of this great wholesome consciousness, it always associates with agreeable feeling. It should be recognized in this way. In other words \_\_\_ as mentioned in previous section of ***bojjhanga kosalla*** (mastery in factors of enlightenment), volume I, those causal ***dhammas*** of arising of ***pītisambujjhanga*** are causal ***dhammas*** of association of agreeable feeling in the arising of this great wholesome consciousness. ***(Abhi-A-1-117)*** 

**8.M. Causal *dhammas* of arising of association with knowledge** 

Due to these causal ***dhammas***, 

1. ***kammato***  =  availability  of  determinative  dependence  of  action  (***kamma***)  which  is foundation of knowledge, 
1. ***upapattito*** = having ***paṭisandhi*** in *brahma’s* world, 
3. ***indriyaparipākato*** = maturity of controlling faculty of wisdom, 
3. ***kilesadurībhāvato*** = occurrence of distance from defilements, it should be recognized arising of association with knowledge during arising of great wholesome consciousness. 
1. ***kammato*** = such person had got experience to preach ***dhammas*** to others in previous time. He had taught others technology (***sippāyana***) such as horse riding skill, elephant riding skill etc., which are professional techniques; ***kammāyatana*** (craft), such as trade, ploughing, tending cows etc, which are professional crafts; ***vijjāṭṭhāna*** (astrology), which is capable of foreseeing life-expectancy, which is also professional art. He had experience to arrange for preaching ***dhammas*** by offering something preacher. After praying that “may I be become great wise person in future”, he had experience to offer various kinds of  things.  When  the  wholesome  deed  arises  depending  on  action  which  had  been cultivated  in  previous  lives  of  that  person,  only  wholesome  consciousness  which associates with knowledge usually arises in his continuum. 
1. ***upapattito***  =  In  the  continuum  of  person  who  has  got  ***paṭisandhi***  in  fine-material *brahma’s*  spheres  where  lack  anger,  the  wholesome  which  depends  on  the  status  of ***paṭisandhi*** usually arises through association with knowledge, in accordance with the preaching found in ***Sotānugata Sutta*** preached by the Exalted One that ….. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Ang-1-505)* PAGE-167** 

- In the continuum of that person in those *brahma’s* world words of ***dhammas*** of conditioned things  appear  apparently  as  floating;  ***Bhikkhus***  …  the  arising  of  mindfulness,  which  is capable of pondering ***dhammas*** through following it, might be retarded, slow; actually by the time the mindfulness, which is capable of pondering ***dhammas*** through following it, arises that being has got quota of the supra-mundane ***dhammas*** called (Path and Fruit-Knowledge), ***nibbāna*** quickly. ***(Ang-1-505)*** 

[**Notes:** \_\_\_ The ***Pāli*** Text of this ***Sotānugata Sutta***, “***tassas… pa … visesagāmīhoti***” etc…, is showing about a ***bhikkhu*** in such way that a ***Bhikkhu*** had learned in scripture with (9)  kinds  of  noble  qualities  and  then  while  he  was  trying  to  attain  matured  ***vipassanā*** knowledge  he  passed  away;  and  then  he  has  got  ***paṭisandhi***  of  heavenly  abode  and supramundane ***dhammas*** also attains quickly in heavenly abode. This ***Pāli*** Text not does not show directly on the fact how he reach into *brahma’s* world called ***avyāpajjaloka***. Therefore with intention to know that ***Pāli*** Text has been taken as example for occurrence of the person who  has  quota  of  the  supramundane  ***dhamma***  called  ***visesagāmī***  \_\_\_  the  commentator ***Sayādaw***  explained  that  “***iminā  nayena***  =  in  accordance  with  the  preaching  found  in ***Sotānugata Sutta***”. As the person who has got ***paṭisandhi*** in heavenly worlds, for the person who has got ***paṭisandhi*** in *brahma’s* world it might be retarded and slow in recollection of ***dhammas*** which had been practiced in ***Bhikkhu*** life, but as soon as mindfulness arises it will be  very  quick  to  attain  supramundane  ***dhamma***  continuously.  It,  therefore,  means  the wholesome which arises depending on having ***paṭisandhi*** in *brahma’s* world also associates with knowledge only.] 

3. ***Indriyaparipākato*** =  In the continuum of persons with age range of between 40-50 who is  called  ***paññādasaka***  (=decade  of  maturing  intellect  in  a  person’s  life),  when wholesome  deed  arises  depending  on  maturity  of  controlling  faculty  of  wisdom  it associates with knowledge. 
4. ***kilesadūrībhāvato***  =  Such  persons  have  removed  impurities  of  defilements  either temporarily  or  for  long  time  through  powerful  efficiency  of  ***samatha***  and  ***vipassanā*** practices. In the continuum of those persons, when wholesome deed arises depending on occurrence of distance from defilements, it usually associates with knowledge. 

***yogā ve jāyatī bhūri, ayogā bhūri sañkhaya. (Khu-1-53, Abhi-A-118) yogāti bhāvanābhiyogā samādhito. (Mūlaṭi-1-70)*** 

**PAGE-168** 

- Due to concentration which is a factor of strenuous diligence in practice, actually, the wisdom, which is great huge like the earth, arises consequently. Due to failure of strenuous diligence  in  practice,  using  up  of  wisdom,  which  is  great  huge  like  the  earth,  arises consequently. ***(Khu-1-53)*** 

These are (4) kinds of factors for arising of association with knowledge. In other words,  those  (7)  factors  of  arising  of  ***dhammavicayasanbojjhanga***  )  =  factor  of enlightenment of wisdom) are also factors for arising of association with knowledge. [Those (7) factors have already mentioned in section of ***bojjhanga kosalla***, Volume I.] ***(Abhi-A-1- 117, 118)*** 

***8.N. Ways of perceiving on visible-object*** 

It  is  mentioned  repeatedly  the  fact  mental  ***dhammas***  of  eye-door  and  mind-door cognitive processes take visible-object with the help of tables. Successive olden day teachers expressed  traditionally  various  ways  of  perceiving  of  visible  object  by  those  cognitive processes as follows \_\_\_\_\_ 

***vaṇṇam  pathamacittenā,  tītam  dutiyacetasā  nāmam  tatiyacittena,  attham catutthacetasā.*** 

***saddam  pathamacittenā,  tītam  dutiyacetasā  nāmam  tatiyacittena,  attham catutthacetasā.***  

In accordance with saying of olden day teachers, such as ***Maṇimañjūsā tīkā*** etc.,\_\_\_\_ 

1. By taking present visible-object as object, eye-door-cognitive process arise once. Afterwards, by separation with life-continuums \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. By mere taking past visible-object which has been taken by eye-door-cognitive process, following mind-door-cognitive process falls once.  Afterwards, by separation with life-continuums \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. By taking object of concept of nomenclature of past visible-object, white, yellow etc., pure mind-door-cognitive process falls once. Afterwards, by separation with life-continuums \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. By taking object of meaning of past visible-object which has been seen, pure mind-door- cognitive process falls once again. 

**PAGE-169** 

Thus when visible-object strikes eye-door and mind-door simultaneously \_\_\_\_\_ 

eye-door-cognitive process … (1) time, mind-door-cognitive process (3) times, totally (4) times of cognitive processes arise continuously and only when it comes up to specified times one can distinguish and realize variously on the object, such as white, yellow, who, what etc. Eye-door-cognitive process takes visible-object (= colour) only. Wholesome or unwholesome impulsions will fall depending on wise attention or unwise attention accordingly. 

**8.O.  Efficiency  of  various  consciousness  of  fivefold  doors  and  mind-door  cognitive** 

**processes** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-2-323) (Abhi-A-2-387,388) (Abhi-2-333) (Abhi-A-2-387)*** 

The essence of these ***Pāli*** Texts and commentaries is as follows : \_\_\_\_\_ 

Fivefold consciousness called seeing-consciousness, hearing-consciousness, smelling- consciousness, tasting-consciousness, touching-consciousness, have no ***āvajjana*** (=adverting) which is capable of taking into heart respective objects. It means fivefold consciousness do not have any kind of these four functions, viz.,  

1. ***āvaṭṭana*** = cause to rotate continuity of life-continuums 
1. ***ābhoga*** = cause to return back life-continuums as whirlpool 
1. ***samannāhāra*** = bearing respective objects, visible-object etc., 
1. ***manasikāra*** = taking into heart respective objects, visible-object etc., 

These (4) kinds of functions, ***āvaṭṭana*** etc., are, actually, functions of ***āvajjana*** and are synonyms of ***āvajjana*** (=adverting) only. 

1. Seeing-consciousness merely strikes on visible-object (towards visible-object) 
1. Hearing-consciousness merely strikes on audible-object (towards audible-object) 
1. Smelling-consciousness merely strikes on olfactory-object (towards olfactory-object) 
1. Tasting-consciousness merely strikes on sapid-object (towards sapid-object) 
1. Touching-consciousness merely strikes on tactile-object (towards tactile-object) 

**PAGE-170** 

It means that ….. 

1. seeing-consciousness perceives visible-object (=colour) only; 
1. hearing-consciousness perceives audible-object (=sound) only; 
1. smelling-consciousness perceives olfactory-object (=odour) only; 
1. tasting-consciousness perceives sapid-object (=flavour) only; 
1. touching-consciousness perceives tactile-object (=touch) only; 

Mere  percept  in  this  way  is  called  ***abhinipātamatta***  (=  mere  striking  towards respective objects of fivefold consciousness). 

Thus  fivefold  consciousness  can  not  perceive  any  ***dhamma***,  except  mere  striking towards respective objects. 

In other words \_\_\_ Even though a such person might be very sharp wisdom one any kind  of  ***dhammas***  among  wholesome  ***dhammas***  and  unwholesome  ***dhammas***,  excluding visible-object  etc.,  which  strike  towards  fivefold consciousness,  can  not be perceived by fivefold consciousness. 

Furthermore \_\_\_\_\_ among these fivefold consciousness \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. seeing-consciousness  has  got  only  a  certain  extent  called  seeing  on  visible-object;  it merely sees visible-object. 
1. hearing-consciousness has got only a certain extent called hearing on audible-object; it merely hears audible-object. 
1. smelling-consciousness has got only a certain extent called smelling on olfactory-object; it merely smells olfactory-object. 
4. tasting-consciousness  has  got  only  a  certain  extent  called  tasting  on  spaid-object;  it merely tastes spaid-object. 
4. touching-consciousness has got only a certain extent called touching on tactile-object; it merely touches tactile-object. 

It is said in turn, there is no ability to realize wholesome ***dhammas*** etc., free from certain extent of the function, seeing etc., in these fivefold consciousness. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Abhi-2-333) (Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

Not only fivefold consciousness but the mind-element called receiving-consciousness also can not perceive any other ***dhammas***, other than respective fivefold objects. 

**PAGE-171** 

[In the term, ***manodhātuyāpi***, the word, ***pi***, has the meaning of adding. It is intended to say remaining  consciousness  must  also  be  added,  resulting  in  referring  to  investigating, determining,  impulsions,  registering  consciousness  which  will  arise  successively  after receiving consciousness.] 

Therefore both receiving mind-element and remaining consciousness of five-doors cognitive processes, investigating, determining etc., are unable to perceive any ***dhamma*** of wholesome or unwholesome ***dhammas***. It should be recognized the meaning of ***Pāli*** term, ***manodhātuyāpi***, in this way. ***(Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

It means that because  

1. seeing-consciousness perceives visible-object (= colour) only; 
1. hearing-consciousness perceives audible-object (= sound) only; 
1. smelling-consciousness perceives olfactory-object (= odour) only; 
1. tasting-consciousness perceives sapid-object (= flavour) only; 
1. touching-consciousness perceives tactile-object (= touch) only; 

even any kind of ***dhamma***, wholesome, unwholesome etc., can not be perceived by those consciousness of five-door-cognitive processes. 

**8.P. Any kind of deportments can not be generated *Pāli Quotation (Abhi-2-323-324) (Abhi-A-2-388)* PAGE-172** 

Those words, “consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes can not generate any kind of deportment”, must also be recognized similarly as mentioned above. 

Explanation \_\_\_ Those consciousness consisting in five-doors-cognitive processes can not generate any kind of (4) deportments called walking, standing, sitting, reclining. It can not bring forth either bodily action or verbal action as beginning. ***(Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

[**Notes:**  \_\_\_\_\_  Those  fivefold-consciousness,  seeing-consciousness  etc.,  can  not generate  even  ***citta***ja***rūpa***  only.  It  is  no  need  to  say  ability  to  generate  expression corporealities  (***viññattirūpa***).  Remaining  consciousness  of  five-doors-cognitive  processes, other than fivefold consciousness, can generate ordinary ***cittajarūpa***, but not corporeal units which are consisting expression corporealities  called bodily  expression  corporealities and verbal expression corporealities. During performing any kind of deportments, walking etc., expression  corporealities  are  essential;  during  performing  bodily  and  verbal  actions expression  corporealities  are  essential.  It  should,  therefore,  be  recognized  those consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes can not generate bodily and verbal action as beginning. However they can generate very weak mentally action (***manokamma***).] 

Wholesome  ***dhamma***,  unwholesome  ***dhamma***  can  not  be  generated  by  various consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes. ***(Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

[***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Mūlaṭī-2-201)*** 

- Basing on way of taking into heart called wise attention, unwise attention, those 

impulsions  of  five-doors-cognitive  processes  can  occur  as  wholesome  or  unwholesome impulsions accordingly. In this case the words, “***na samādiyate*** = not generate”, do not mean that “can not occur”. It means various consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes can not observe in a way that “this wholesome deed will be performed; this unwholesome deed will be performed” as observing religious precepts or duties.] 

Mundane  absorption  concentration  (=mundane  absorption  attainment)  can  not  be entered through various consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes. 

Supra mundane absorption concentration (=supra mundane absorption attainment) can not  be  entered  through  various  consciousness  of  five-doors-cognitive  processes.  Due  to inability  to  enter  both  mundane  and  supra  mundane  absorptions  (=attainments),  those consciousness  can  not  emerge  from  mundane  and  supra  mundane  concentration (=attainments) also. ***(Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

A life can not pass away through consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes. The ***paṭisandhi*** can not exist in the next life through consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes.  It  is  right.  \_\_\_  Various  functions  mentioned  above,  from  the  beginning  of perceiving  wholesome,  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  until  death,  can  be  generated  through consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process only but not through consciousness of five- doors-cognitive processes. Therefore the Exalted one rejected impulsions together with all consciousness of five-door-cognitive processes in the circumstance of performing all above various functions. 

***[Pāli*** ***Quotation (Mūlaṭī-2-201)* PAGE-173** 

Death  of  five-doors-cognitive  process  (***pañeadvārikacuti***),  does  not  mean  death- consciousness  falls by  means  of  various  consciousness  of  five-doors-cognitive processes. Death-consciousness arises after end of consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes. It does not belong to five-doors-cognitive processes but it is the consciousness free from door. It  is  explained  in  ***Paṭiccasamuppāda  Vibhanga***  in  this  way.  Furthermore-  in  this  place commentary  explained  that  various  functions  mentioned  above,  from  the  beginning  of perceiving  wholesome,  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  until  death,  can  be  generated  through consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process only but not through consciousness of five- doors-cognitive  processes.  However  those  death  and  ***paṭisandhi***-consciousness  are  not consciousness  of  mind-door-cognitive  processes  but  are  free  from  door  only.  In ***Abhidhammatha***  it  is  explained  that  “***dvāravimuttānañca  paṭisandhi-bhavanga-cuti- saṅkātānam***  =  Consciousness  which  are  free  from  door  are  ***paṭisandhi***,  life-continuum, death-consciousness”. 

The  Most  Venerable  ***Mahāgandhārammaṇa***  ***Sayādaw***  explanation  by  which  it  is explained that “even though death consciousness is also free from door function of death is performed  through  mind-door-cognitive  process”  in  sub-commentary  called ***sammohavinodanī bhāsāṭīkā***, volume III page 163, as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

Olden day opinion 

In the commentary called ***Aṭṭhasālinī, cittuppādakhaṇda***, man ***okammadvāra kathā***, it is said that \_\_\_\_\_ 

***“ayam nāma mano manodvāram na hotīti na vattabbo. (Abhi-A-1-129)*** 

- it  is  not  worth  saying  that  “every  mind  is  not  mind-door”.  Because  preceding 

consciousness is the door which is factor consciousness is the door which is factor of arising of succeeding consciousness, every consciousness means mind-door. Thus … “because the consciousness previous to death-consciousness is mind-door, death-consciousness is mind- door,  death-consciousness  ought  to  be  said  as  mind-door,  resulting  in  saying  in  the commentary  that  function  of  death  (***cavanakicca***)  is performed  through  consciousness  of mind-door-cognitive process”… suggested by olden day teachers. 

Essential to be considered \_\_\_\_\_ 

If it is so, consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes are also worth designating as  mind-door  because  preceding  consciousness  is  designated  as  mind  (***mana***)  and  those consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes can not be rejected from list of mind-door- cognitive process. Therefore that opinion is essential to be considered. I consider that due to presence of numerous functions of consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process, function of death  is  also  added  in  functions  of  consciousness  of  mind-door-cognitive  process. (***Sammohavinodanībhāthā ṭīkā*** **volume III, p 163**) 

This is saying of the Most Venerable ***Mahāgandhārammaṇa Sayādaw***. Further more \_\_\_ although function of death is said as end in explanation of commentary, it should be recognized  that  kind  of  saying,  ***cavanapariyosānam***,  is  said  through  ***upalakkhaṇanaya***, ***nidassana  naya***  (=  preaching  methodology  by  which  obvious  and  easy  thing  is  said  as priority) because commentary continues to explain that  “***na bhavantare upapajjati*** = the ***paṭisandhi***  can  not  exist  in  the  next  life  (through  consciousness  of  five-door-cognitive process.] 

**8.Q. Falling into fixed law of nature etc.,** 

Those  functions,  falling  into  fixed  law  of  nature  etc.,  are  also  not  accomplished through consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes. Impulsions of five-doors-cognitive processes can not fall into not only unwholesome deeds which consign a perpetrator to ***avīci*** hell  (***ānatariyakamma***)  which  are  ***micchattaniyama***  (fixed  nature  of  law  by  which perpetrator will reach hell certainly)  etc., but also  Four Noble  Path ***dhammas*** which are ***sammattaniyama*** (fixed nature of law by which the Noble One will reach joyful destination certainly). 

These impulsions of five-doors-cognitive processes do not arise by taking objects of not only name and lineage but also ***paññatti*** (concept), ***kasiṇa***-object etc. Those do not arise as ***lakkhaṇārammanika*** ***vipassanā*** (= ***vipassanā*** with objects of nature of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***).  Those  do  not  arise  as  ***vuṭṭhānagāminī balava  vipassanā***  (= powerful  ***vipassanā*** which is factor of reaching to Noble Path which is emerging from conditioned things. Those do not arise by taking objects of not only fine-material and immaterial ***dhammas*** but also ***nibbāna***. 

Those kinds of Knowledge, viz, Discriminative Knowledge, Superpsychic knowledge, Disciple’s  Enlightenment  Knowledge,  Lesser  Buddha’s  Enlightenment  Knowledge, Omniscient Knowledge can not arise together with those impulsions of five-doors-cognitive processes. 

If  it  is  said  appropriately,  all  kinds  of  knowledge  mentioned  above  are  available through association with impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process only. 

Furthermore these (3) kinds of situations, falling into asleep, waking up, dreaming are not available through consciousness of five-doors-cognitive process. 

The Exalted One  rejected impulsions together  with consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes in these three situations. ***(Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

These  are  significance  and  variation  in  efficiency  of  those  consciousness  of  five- doors-cognitive processes and mind-door-cognitive process. 

Special instructions\_\_\_\_\_ 

In  accordance  with  above  explanations  of  ***Pāli***  Texts,  commentaries  and  sub- commentaries, various consciousness of eye-door-cognitive process merely perceives visible- object (= colour) and various consciousness of remaining five-doors-cognitive processes, ear- door-cognitive process etc., merely perceive respective objects, audible-object (=sound) etc. During perceiving in that way, if determining consciousness determines as colour only and so forth, it is wise attention, resulting in falling of wholesome impulsions. 

**PAGE-175** 

It should not be misunderstood only one mind-door-cognitive process arises after eye- door-cognitive process, due to showing in tables in that way. Due to same occurrence as mind-door-cognitive processes, it has been shown as one time. 

After one time of eye-door-cognitive process many life-continuums fall and numerous mind- door-cognitive processes can arise successively but those are also separated by many life- continuums. Some mind-door-cognitive processes might take objects of either ultimate nature or concept appropriately. In the aspect of ***vipassanā*** practice, numerous mind-door-cognitive processes  can  arise  by  taking  pure  ultimate  nature  of  corporeal  or  mental  ***dhammas***. Therefore  after  keeping  mental  ***dhammas***  of  eye-door-cognitive  process  the  righteous ***meditator*** must keep mental ***dhammas*** occurring in mind-door-cognitive process in mind continuously. If he is unable to keep mental ***dhammas*** of life-continuum in mind, it must be omitted  temporarily.  Numbers  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  life-continuum  are  shown  as  (34) through showing a human being with three roots and both knowledge and ***pīti*** as example. 

**8.R. Visible-object (=colour) line-wholesome group** 

After reading explanation relating on table showing visible-object (= colour) line the righteous ***meditator*** can discern wholesome group mental ***dhammas***. Way of discerning in brief account is as follows : \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. If  visible-object  (=colour)  is  discerned  as  visible-object  (=colour),  eye-door-cognitive process  and  numerous  mind-door-cognitive  process  which  know  visible-object continuously will arise. (Way of discerning has been presented.) Then \_\_\_\_\_ 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as corporeal ***dhamma***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process which know it as corporeal ***dhamma***; 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as ***anicca***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door- cognitive process which know it as ***anicca***; 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as ***dukkha***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door- cognitive process which know it as ***dukkha***; 
1. if that visible-object is discerned as ***anatta***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door- cognitive process which know it as ***anatta***; 
6. if that visible-object is discerned as ***a-subha***, continuity of consciousness of mind-door- cognitive process which know it as ***a-subha***; will arise respectively. 

Those various consciousness of mind-door-cognitive processes must be discerned in order to see ultimate nature of each mental ***dhamma*** through breaking down each compactness of mentality called masses of mentality. 

Because that visible-object, colour, can be realized as corporeal ***dhamma***, ***anicca***, ***dukkha***,  ***anatta***,  ***asubha***  respectively  through  consciousness  of  mind-door-cognitive processes only, if mind-door-adverting bears in mind as corporeal ***dhamma***, ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***asubha*** respectively, it  will be wise-attention and it should be recognized impulsions will be wholesome ones only. 

**PAGE-176** 

During discerning in that way if one discerns as corporeal ***dhamma***, he must try to see phenomena of arising of numerous mind-door-cognitive processes which realize as corporeal ***dhamma***,  and  so  forth.  In  both  impulsions  and  registerings  knowledge  and  p0leasurable interest can associate appropriately. Therefore the righteous ***meditator*** must discern through (4) ways of discerning depending on whether association with knowledge and pleasurable interest or not. 

During discerning in that way life-continuum  mind-clear-element  must be  kept in mind previously. After wards the visible-object which is intended to be discerned must be taken as object. When that visible-object impinges in the life-continuum mind-clear-element if mind-door-adverting performs wise attention on that visible-object, colour, 

1. as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1. as ***anicca***, 
1. as ***dukkha***, 
1. as ***anatta***, 
1. as a***subha*** respectively, 

consciousness and mental concomitants of cognitive processes (=mental ***dhammas***), as shown in table, can be kept in mind easily. When those mental ***dhammas*** of every mind moment within both eye-door-cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive process are kept in mind as a whole, he must discern as “mental ***dhammas***, mental ***dhammas***”. 

Then the heart-base corporeality which is depended base of those mental ***dhammas***, together with (54) kinds of underived and derived corporealities within the heart, and non- real corporealities, space-element etc., must be discerned as “corporeal ***dhammas***, corporeal ***dhammas***”. 

Similarly the eye-base which is depended base of seeing-consciousness, together with (54) kinds of real corporealities within eye, and non-real corporealities which are available must also be discerned as “corporeal ***dhammas***, corporeal ***dhammas***”. 

**8.S. Opinion of base (*vathu*) and object (*ārammaṇa*)** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (M-3-328, Chachakka Sutta) (Mūlaṭī-2-48) (Anuṭī-2-56)* PAGE-177** 

In above ***Pāli*** Text it shows that in the aspect of depended base, it is preached as “***cakkhu*** (=eye-transparent-element)” through singular noun, in the aspect of object, it is preached as ***rūpe*** (visible-object) through plural noun. ***Mūlaṭīkā*** ***Sayādaw*** explained the fact relating to different way of preaching between singular noun and plural noun and the essence of his explanation is as follows :\_\_\_\_\_ 

During  seeing-consciousness  arises  depending  on  the  eye-transparent-element  and visible-object, the eye-transparent-element (= eye-door) lies in the continuum of a being and that eye-transparent-element benefits for arising of seeing-consciousness which also lies in that same continuum through  

1. efficiency of relation of dependence, 
1. efficiency of relation of pre-compatibility (***purejāta paccaya***), 
1. efficiency of relation of controlling faculty, 
1. efficiency of relation of dissociation. 

Visible-objects, however, occur in various continuums, i.e, internal continuum and external continuum and it benefits for arising of seeing-consciousness through efficiency of relation of object. Furthermore there is only single kind and origin of eye-transparent-element in each being, even though quantity of eye-transparent-elements are numerous. Those visible- objects, which can impinge eye-transparent-elements, however, are various kinds and origins, brown, yellow etc. 

Due to presence of single continuum, single kind of eye-transparent-element, it is preached through singular noun. Due to presence of various continuums, various kinds of visible-objects,  it  is  preached  through  plural  noun.  It  should  be  recognized  similarly  in remaining doors, “***sotañca paṭicca sadde ca uppajjati sotaviññāṇam***”, etc. (***Mūlaṭī-2-56***) 

The term, ‘***ca***’ – ***avutta samuccayattha*** 

In those words, “***cakkhuñca rūpe ca***”, the term, ‘***ca***’, has got the meaning which must be inferred unsaying words also (***avutta samuccayattha***). While seeing-consciousness arises, it arises depending on not only eye-transparent-element and visible objects but also five- doors-adverting called mind-element and associating three mental aggregates, i.e., ***phassa***, ***vedanā***, ***saññā, ekaggatā, jīvita***, ***manasikāra***. It should be recognized similarly on remaining doors, “***sotañca paṭicca*** etc. ***(Abhi-A-2-76)*** 

**PAGE-178** 

**8.T. Explanations found in *Mahāṭīkā* and *Anuṭīkā Pāli Quotation (Mahāṭī-2-124, Anuṭī-2-56)*** 

Single eye-transparent-element which lies within a corporeal unit called eye-decad can benefit for arising of seeing-consciousness through occurring as depended base. Seeing- consciousness can arise depending on single eye-transparent-element within an eye-decad. However single visible-object within a corporeal unit can not benefit for arising of seeing- consciousness through efficiency of relation of object. Seeing-consciousness can not perceive single  visible-object  within  a  corporeal  unit.  Groups  of  common  visible-objects  within numerous corporeal units can benefit for arising of seeing-consciousness through efficiency of relation of object. Seeing-consciousness can perceive groups of common visible-objects which are occurring within numerous corporeal units. So as to show this meaning especially, in the side of “***pasāda***” it is preached as “***cakkhuñ***”, through singular noun, in the side of “***ārammaṇa***”, it is preached as “***rūpe***”, through plural. 

[**Notes :** \_\_\_\_\_ Even though the visible-object within a corporeal unit can not be taken as object by seeing-consciousness, it can be perceived by continuity of impulsions of mind-door-cognitive processes, the knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality etc. It is because ***vipassanā*** impulsions can realize penetratively up to the field of ultimate nature by breaking down various compactness of corporeality, corporeal unit etc.] 

With regarding to these words, “single eye-transparent-element can benefit for arising of seeing-consciousness but visible-object can benefit it only when common visible-objects are  available”,  what  are  causal  ***dhammas***?  It  can  be  answered  that  it  is  significance occurrence of ability to benefit. When eye-transparent-element benefits seeing-consciousness through 

1. efficiency of relation of dependence, 
1. efficiency of relation of pre-compatibility, 
1. efficiency of relation of controlling faculty,  
1. efficiency of relation of dissociation, 

the eye-transparent which is existing within three-time-phases called ***uppāda***-***ṭhiti***- ***bhanga*** can benefit for arising of seeing-consciousness. It is because only when that eye- transparent-element is still arising through three-time-phases called ***uppāda***-***ṭhiti***-***bhanga*** that seeing-consciousness can arise apparently or if that eye-transparent-element is absent (due to blind condition etc,), that seeing-consciousness can not arise apparently. 

[**Notes:**  \_\_\_  Eye-transparent-element  with  life-span  of  (17)  mind-moments  can benefit  arising  of  seeing-consciousness  through  efficiency  of  relation  of  dependence  etc, during static phase of itself. Especially seeing-consciousness usually arises depending on the eye-transparent-element called ***majjhimāyuka***, which arises simultaneously with past life- continuum. Therefore it means during arising of seeing-consciousness, depended base called eye-transparent-element is also still present apparently.] 

**PAGE-179** 

Due to this reason, the Exalted One preached that the eye-transparent-element benefits for arising of seeing-consciousness through \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. efficiency of relation of presence, 
1. efficiency of relation of non-disappearance (***avigatapaccaya***). 

How consciousness depend on base corporeality \_\_\_\_\_ 

In such kind of saying that seeing-consciousness arises depending on eye-transparent- element the former does not arise through overlapping on the latter or through attaching on vicinity of the latter. It is because seeing-consciousness is only mental ***dhamma*** without any mass. As the pupil depends on teacher or as male member of the royal entourage depend on the king, similarly \_\_\_\_\_ it is worth desiring on the meaning that seeing-consciousness can not  arise  in  the  absence  of  eye-transparent-element  but  the  former  has  ability  to  arise depending on the latter i.e, the nature of dependence relation. 

It  should  be  understood  remaining  kinds  of  relations,  other  than  relation  of dependence, pre-compatibility etc., through various kinds of nature, previous arising before seeing-consciousness  etc.  Because  the  relation  of  dependence  of  single  eye-transparent- element  is  appropriate  to  benefit  seeing-consciousness,  the  Exalted  One  preached  as “***cakkhuñca paṭicca***” through singular noun. 

Visible-object\_\_\_\_\_  Due  to  occurrence  of  ability  to  benefit  for  arising  of  seeing- consciousness during static phase only, the visible-object, colour also benefits that seeing- consciousness  through  efficiency  of  relation  of  pre-compatibility,  presence,  non- disappearance  as  eye-base.  However  only  when  collectiveness  of  visible-objects  within numerous corporeal units can benefit for arising of seeing-consciousness through efficiency of relation of object. It is because visible-object is the object which is deserving to perceive by seeing-consciousness. 

**PAGE-180** 

***Ārammaṇa = ālambhaṇa*** 

The consciousness arises through appearing any kind of object factor of such ultimate nature or concept which is not present in the aspect of ultimate sense but a kind of nature arisen through consideration. 

Consciousness  is ***sārammaṇa***  ***dhamma***  which  is  capable  of  taking  object but  not ***anārammaṇa*** (= ***dhamma*** which is not capable of taking object). Therefore consciousness can not arise without taking any kind of object. Due to occurrence of deserving to hold by consciousness  which  is  capable  of  taking  object  such  ***dhamma***  is  called  ***ālambhana  = ārammaṇa*** = object. 

The relation of object of that consciousness is available by means of attaining the nature of any kind of factors which may be 

1. ultimate ***dhamma*** or 
1. concept  (***pañnatti***)  which  is  ***pari-kappita***  (a  kind  of  nature  which  arises  through consideration). 

Therefore when seeing-consciousness arises by taking visible-object, colour it arises through appearing the nature of that visible-object. Ability to take the nature of that object by that consciousness which has got relation with controlling faculty, eye etc., (=ability to attain the object as colour, sound etc., or man, woman etc.,) can not arise through efficiency of colour which consists in only one or two corporeal units or a few corporeal units (= 4 or 5 corporeal units). Actually it can arise through reaching to the appearance which is adaptable to take into heart by oneself. Therefore the Exalted One preached as ***rūpe***, as plural noun, in the aspect of object in order to show clearly the fact benefiting phenomenon of collectiveness of colour of numerous corporeal units arises for seeing-consciousness. (***Mahāṭī-2-124, Anuṭī- 2-56, 57***) 

**8.U. During preaching as “*rūpāyatanam*”** 

In  ***paṭṭhāna,  Abhidhamma***,  the  Exalted  One  preached  that  \_\_\_\_\_  “***rūpāyatanam*** ***cakkhuviññāṇadhātuyā  tansampayuthakānañca  dhammānam  arammaṇa  paccayena paccaye***.” ***(Abhi-8-1)*** 

- Visible-object (***rūpāyatana***) benefits both seeing-consciousness element and mental 

concomitants which are associating mental ***dhammas*** of that seeing-consciousness element through  efficiency  of  relation  of  object.  In  those  preaching  words,  it  is  found  that “***rūpāyatanam***” is preached as singular form. There is a reasonable question that how it can be understood that way of preaching. The answer is as follows : \_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-181** 

The  visible-object  with  such  nature  can  benefit  seeing-consciousness  through efficiency of relation of object; with referring to only visible-object (=***rūpāyatana***) with that nature the Exalted One preached, it should be recognized on those words in this way. 

If it is so when one can question again that which kind of nature can be found in that visible-object referred by the Exalted One, it can be answered those visible-objects have got the nature of collectiveness. This kind of meaning is obvious really. 

Therefore seeing-consciousness etc., have got specific object which is deserving to recognized through perceiving external bases (***āyatana***). (= It means those consciousness perceive colour only.) They have not got object through perceiving shape and form (= shape and form of man, woman, buffalo, cow etc,), said by some teachers. Those teacher’s sayings are appropriate. 

In this case one should not be doubtful on the fact seeing-consciousness has got object which can be taken as collectiveness of visible-object only. It is because there is no way of taking into heart nature of collectiveness (due to taking into heart colour only). However only collectiveness of ***dhammas*** of colour called ***rūpāyatana*** (external bases) are the relation of object of seeing-consciousness. 

There is a reasonable question that how collectiveness of colour which is incapable of benefiting to seeing-consciousness individually can arise the relation of object of seeing- consciousness. 

It  is  reasonable  question,  and  if  one  complains  that  even  though  group  of  blind persons are gathering those persons are unable to see \_\_\_ 

this  kind  of  meaning  is  not  fixed  nature  between  individual  and  collectiveness ***dhammas***. Individual person can not carry stretcher, planquin etc. However collectiveness of many persons can carry stretcher, planquin etc. Due to obvious occurrence of ability in that way in worldly life, this kind of meaning that “collectiveness of individual persons are unable to accomplish although those individual persons are gathering” is not always right principle fixedly. 

**PAGE-182** 

Furthermore \_\_\_ although it is incapable of taking object of individual hair etc., on the head, it is capable of taking object of collectiveness of hair etc., on that place. Therefore it is obvious evidence on benefitable occurrence of collectiveness of visible-object for arising of seeing-consciousness. 

It should be recognized with regarding to sayings mentioned above such reproof that whether visible-object of sub-particle is object of seeing-consciousness or whether visible- object of collectiveness of those sub-particles are objects of seeing-consciousness etc., have been already rejected. 

It should be recognized on those doors, “***sotañca paṭicca sadde ca***” etc. in similar way. (***Mahāṭī-2-125, Anuṭī-57, 58)*** 

To be careful \_\_\_\_\_ 

According to opinions relating to explanations on base and object, mentioned above, it should be recognized mental ***dhammas*** of eye-door-cognitive process are unable to take object of colour of single corporeal unit but colour of numerous corporeal units. 

However  although  following  mind-door-cognitive  process  and  pure  mind-door- cognitive  processes  which  take  visible-object  continuously  can  take  object  of  colour  of collectiveness of corporeal units generally, those mind-door-cognitive processes which are lead by ***vipassanā*** knowledge can take object of not only colour of collectiveness of corporeal units but also colour of single corporeal unit. Therefore during keeping visible-object line mental ***dhammas*** it is instructed to keep in mind object of colour of both single corporeal unit and collectiveness of corporeal units in page (152). 

It should be recognized it must be distinguished the fact with referring to mind-door- cognitive processes which can take object of ultimate nature, single corporeal unit must be kept in mind and with referring to those mind-door-cognitive processes which can not take object of ultimate nature, numerous corporeal units must be kept in mind respectively. 
PAGE25
PAGE27

Very interesting fact \_\_\_\_\_ 

In this case different opinions of noble teachers are also very interesting fact. While seeing-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on eye-transparent- element, it is question that whether those mental ***dhammas*** depend on single eye-transparent- element or not. 

While  remaining  consciousness  of  eye-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door- cognitive processes arise depending on heart-base, it is question that whether those mental ***dhammas*** depend on single heart-base or not. 

**PAGE-183** 

There are two opinions \_\_\_ i.e.,  

1. those mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on obvious powerful single heart-base only, 
1. those mental ***dhammas*** arise depending on numerous depended base corporealities. 

The righteous ***meditator*** should like to scrutinize practically on the fact which opinion is better and appropriate. 

Among those two opinions the first one is conformed with the explanations found in ***Mahāṭīkā*** and ***Anuṭīkā*** which comment the ***Pāli*** Text, “***cakkhuñca paṭicca rūpe ca upajjati***” etc. However sub-commentator ***Sayādaw*** preferred the second opinion. (See ***Mūlaṭīkā-2-48***) 

During arising through depending on single depended base in that way \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. five-doors-adverting arises depending on any powerful and obvious kind of heart-bases- corporealities  which  arise  synchronously  with  life-continuum  (cessation)  called ***bhavangupaccheda***; 
1. seeing-consciousness arises depending on any powerful and obvious kind of eye-bases- corporealities  which  arise  synchronously  with  past  life-continuum  (***atītabhavanga***), which has got middle life-span called ***majjhimāyuka***; 
1. receiving-consciousness arises depending on any powerful and obvious kind of heart- bases-corporealities which arise synchronously with seeing-consciousness and so forth; it should be understood respectively in this way. 

It  should  be  recognized  in  brief  all  kinds  of  consciousness,  excluding  fivefold consciousness,  arise  depending  on  any  powerful  and  obvious  kind  of  heart-bases- corporealities which arise synchronously with each preceding mind moment, ***paṭisandhi*** etc., unfixedly (***aniyama***). 

Here it will be presented about ***mandāyuka-amandāyuka-majjhimāyuka*** transparent elements and consciousness with the help of tables shown by venerable Mine khine ***Sayādaw*** from his book “diagram showing ***vīthi*** etc”. 
PAGE27

Vol 2, pg 153-200.doc 

**PAGE-184** 

**Diagram .1. *atimahantārammaṇa cakkhudvāravīthi-tadārammaṇa vāra*** 



|Take any kind of action-emblem of action-emblem of destination |***ckkhudvāravīthi***-it takes present visible-object ||
| :- | - | :- |
|bh °°° |
|||
|***majjhimāyuka*** (1) ||
**Diagram .2 *First mahantārammaṇa cakkhudvāravīthi - javanavāra*** 



|Take any kind of action-emblem of action-emblem of destination |***cakkhudvāravīthi***-it takes present visible-object ||
| :- | - | :- |
|bh °°° |
|||
|***majjhimāyuka*** (1) ||

PAGE27

28

**PAGE-185** 

**Diagram .3 *Second mahantārammaṇa cakkhudvāravīthi - javanavāra*** 



|Take any kind of action-emblem of action-emblem of destination |***cakkhudvāravīthi***-it takes present visible-object ||
| :- | - | :- |
|pa  ca   sa  ṇa  vu  ja    ja   ja   ja  ja    ja   ja    °°° °°° °°° °°° °°° °°°  °°° °°° °°° °°°  °°° °°°   |bh °°° |
|***majjhimāyuka*** (9) |||
**PAGE-185** 

**Diagram .4 *First parittārammaṇa cakkhudvāravīthi -voṭṭhabbanavāra*** 



|Take any kind of action-emblem of action-emblem of destination |***cakkhudvāravīthi***-it takes  present visible-object |||
| :- | :- | :- | :- |
|pa  ca   sa  ṇa  vu  vu     °°° °°° °°° °°° °°° °°°     |bh  bh  bh  bh  bh °°° °°° °°° °°°  °°° |bh °°° |
|***majjhimāyuka*** (1) ||||

PAGE

**PAGE-186** 

**8.V. *mandāyuka-amandāyuka-majjhāmāyuka*** 

Those eye-transparent-elements, viz., 

1. ***mandāyuka pasāda***, 
1. ***amandāyuka pasāda***, 
1. ***majjhimāyuka pasāda*** 

are having life-span of (17) mind moments called ***sattarasāyuka***. Although they have got  the  same  life-span  they  are  designated  as  variously  depending  on  time  of  cessation synchronously with five-fold objects, previous to and after cessation of five-fold objects, i.e, ***majjhimāyuka, mandāyuka*** and ***amandāyuka*** respectively. 

The eye-transparent-element which arises synchronously with the arising phase of ***atītabhavanga***  ceases  synchronously  with  visible-object  which  impinge  it,  in ***atimahantārammaṇa cakkhudvāravīthi***. It has got middle life-span, resulting in designation as ***majjhimāyuka***. 

Because those (37) eye-transparent-elements which arise at mind moments previous to ***atītabhavanga*** (especially preceding life-continuum mind moments) usually cease before cessation of visible-object which impinges on it, it can be said it has got shorter life-span than visible-object, resulting in designation as ***mandāyuka***. 

Because (11) eye-transparent-elements which arise at the arising phase and perishing phase of atītabhavanga do not cease until cessation of visible-object which impinges it, it can be  said  it  has  got  longer  life  span  than  that  visible-object,  resulting  in  designation  as ***amandāyuka***. It should be understood similarly on remaining eye-door-cognitive processes and ear-door-cognitive process etc. 

Among  those  ***mandāyuka***,  ***amandāyuka***,  ***majjhimāyuka***  five  transparent  elements which are worth depending by fivefold-consciousness through making benefiting efficiency of  relation  of  dependence,  pre  compatibility  resulted  from  presence  of  life-span  without ceasing until fivefold consciousness arise, ***Abhidhammāvatāra*** ***ṭīkā*** decided that fivefold consciousness  arises  depending  on  ***majjhimāyuka***  five-transparent-elements,  with  many reproofs. The opinion in which decided that fivefold-consciousness arises depending on five- transparent-elements  which  arise  synchronously  with  either  five-doors-adverting  or  life- continuum (cessation) is, however, rejected. (***tathāpi vicāretabbamidam thānam*** = In this case, however, should be scrutinized with reasoning.) 

Among  those  mind-consciousness  mind  moments  which  arise  in  five-groups- existences, ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness depends on heart-base which arise synchronously with itself.  Those  mind-consciousness  mind  moments,  life-continuum  etc.,  always  depend  on heart-bases which arise synchronously with contiguous mines moment before themselves. When one emerges from cessation absorption called ***nirodhasamāpatti*** , consciousness of fruit  (mind  moments)  of  Non  –returnee  and  Arahant  depend  on  heart-base  which  arises synchronously with contiguous mind moment before themselves. During moribund period, those mind-consciousness mind moments, life-continuum, adverting etc., depend on heart- base which arises synchronously with the (17th) mind moment counted backward from death- consciousness. (Venerable Minekhine ***Sayādaw***’s Diagrams showing ***vīthi*** etc., Page-2) 

**PAGE-187** 

**8.W. Audible-object (= sound) line-way of discerning on mental *dhammas*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE41

If  wholesome  group  mental  ***dhammas***,  including  audible-object  line  wholesome impulsions, are wanted to be discerned, 

1. ear-transparent-element  and  life-continuum  mind  clear  element  must be  kept  in  mind simultaneously. 
1. Then any kind of sounds (=audible-object) must be taken as object from outside. That sound (=audible-object) must be discerned 
1. as audible-object (=sound), 
1. as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1. as ***anicca***, 
1. as ***dukkha***, 
1. as ***anatta***, 
1. as a***subha***, 

through dividing (6) ways. As shown in visible-object (= colour) line, each way of discerning  must  be  performed  through  four  ways  depending  on  association  with  or dissociation from knowledge and pleasurable interest. Due to occurrence of wise-attention, wholesome  impulsions  of  ear-door-cognitive  processes  will  arise.  Ear-door-cognitive processes consists of five-doors-adverting, hearing-consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, (7) times of impulsions, and (2) times of registering. (It is ***atimahantārammaṇa vīthi***.) Depended bases of hearing-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas*** are (54) kinds of underived and derived corporealities existing in ear. Remaining mind moments and associating  mental  ***dhammas***  of  ear-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door-cognitive processes arise depending on (54) kinds of underived and derived corporelaities existing in heart (mind-door). (See tables of ***rūpakammaṭṭhāna*** again). Remaining facts are very easy to be understood. In this door the righteous ***meditator*** must discern 6x4=24 ways as shown in eye door. 

If the righteous ***meditator*** discerns mental ***dhammas*** by taking object of sound which is internal sound like breathing sound of himself, he has to analyze sound nonads corporal units occurring in in-breath and out-breath up to the field of ultimate reality with the help of penetrative knowledge. 

**8.X. Olfatcory-object (= smell) line** 

If  wholesome  group  mental  ***dhammas***,  including  olfactory-object  line  wholesome impulsions, are wanted to be discerned, 

3. nose-transparent-element and life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind simultaneously. 
3. Olfactory-object of numerous corporeal units or single corporeal unit (if only mind-door- cognitive process is intended to discern) must be taken as object. (Compactness called ***ghana*** must be broken down.) 

**PAGE-188** 

That smell (=olfactory-object) must be discerned 

7. as olfactory-object (= smell), 
7. as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
7. as ***anicca***, 
7. as ***dukkha***, 
7. as ***anatta***, 
7. as ***asubha***, 

through  dividing  (6)  ways.  As  shown  in  olfactory-object  (=  smell)  line,  each  way  of discerning  must  be  performed  through  four  ways  depending  on  association  with  or dissociation from knowledge and pleasurable interest. Due to occurrence of wise-attention, wholesome  impulsions  of  nose-door-cognitive  processes  will  arise.  Nose-door-cognitive processes consists of five-doors-adverting, smelling-consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, (7) times of impulsions, and (2) times of registering. (It is ***atimahantārammaṇa vīthi***.) Depended bases of smelling-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas*** are (54) kinds of underived and derived corporealities existing in ear. Remaining mind moments and associating  mental  ***dhammas***  of  nose-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door-cognitive processes arise depending on (54) kinds of underived and derived corporelaities existing in heart (mind-door). (See tables of ***rūpakammaṭṭhāna*** again). Remaining facts are very easy to be understood. In this door the righteous ***meditator*** must discern 6x4=24 ways as shown in eye-door. 

**8.Y Sapid-object (= taste) line** 

If  wholesome  group  mental  ***dhammas***,  including  sapid-object  line  wholesome impulsions, are wanted to be discerned, 

1. tongue-transparent-element and life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind simultaneously. 
1. Sapid-object of numerous corporeal units or single corporeal unit (if only mind-door- cognitive process is intended to discern) must be taken as object. (Compactness called ***ghana*** must be broken down.) 

That taste (= sapid-object) must be discerned 

1. as sapid-object (= taste), 
1. as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1. as ***anicca***, 
1. as ***dukkha***, 
1. as ***anatta***, 
1. as a***subha***, 

through dividing (6) ways. As shown in sapid-object (= taste) line, each way of discerning must be performed through four ways depending on association with or dissociation from knowledge  and  pleasurable  interest.  Due  to  occurrence  of  wise-attention,  wholesome impulsions of tongue-door-cognitive processes will arise. Tongue-door-cognitive processes consists of five-doors-adverting, tasting-consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, (7)  times  of  impulsions,  and  (2)  times  of  registering.  (It  is  ***atimahantārammaṇa  vīthi***.) Depended bases of tasting-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas*** are (54) kinds of underived  and  derived  corporealities  existing  in  tongue.  Remaining  mind  moments  and associating  mental  ***dhammas***  of  tongue-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door-cognitive processes arise depending on (54) kinds of underived and derived corporelaities existing in heart (mind-door). (See tables of ***rūpakammaṭṭhāna*** again). Remaining facts are very easy to be understood. In this door the righteous ***meditator*** must discern 6x4=24 ways as shown in eye-door. 

**PAGE-189** 

**8.Z. Tactile-object (= touch) line** 

If  wholesome  group  mental  ***dhammas***,  including  tactile-object  line  wholesome impulsions, are wanted to be discerned, 

1. body-transparent-element and life-continuum mind clear element must be kept in mind simultaneously. 
1. Any kind of three elements, i.e. 
1) earth-element, 
1) fire-element, 
1) air-element 

which are designated as tactile-object of numerous corporeal units (or a corporeal unit) which are lying touching with that body-transparent-element must be kept in mind. (Most obvious element only must be kept in mind as priority.) 

When that tactile-object appears both in body-door (= body-transparent-element) and mind-door (= life-continuum mind-clear-element) simultaneously, that tactile-object must be discerned. 

1. as tactile-object (as earth-element, as fire-element, as air-element or as nature of hardness, as nature of  hotness, as nature of supporting) 
1. as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1. as ***anicca***, 
1. as ***dukkha***, 
1. as ***anatta***, 
1. as ***a-subha***. 

through  dividing  (6)  ways.  Due  to  occurrence  of  wise-attention,  wholesome impulsions  of  body-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door-cognitive  process  will  arise. Among those cognitive e process impulsions of body-door-cognitive processes can perceive as touching-element only but not as corporeal ***dhamma***, as ***anicca***, as ***dukkha***, as ***anatta***, as ***a-subha***.  Those  impulsions  of  mind-door-cognitive processes  can  realize  all  (6)  kinds  of nature respectively. 

Continuity  of  body-door-cognitive  process  includes\_\_\_\_  five-doors-adverting, touching-consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, (7) times of impulsions and (2) times of registering. Mind-door-cognitive process is now, easy to be understood. Touching-consciousness  arises  depending  on  (44)  kinds  of  corporeal  ***dhammas*** 

together with body-transparent-element, which are occurring in any part of body, i.e. hips which are discerned by insight. Remaining consciousness of body-door-cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive process arise depending on (54) kinds of corporealities, including heart- base, within the heart. 

**PAGE-190** 

[Notes: \_\_\_\_\_ Because there are three kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** called touching element, i.e., earth-element, fire-element, air-element, the righteous ***meditator*** those three element, 

1. earth-element, 
1. fire-element, 
1. air-element, 

which are existing in the corporeal unit which is the closet one to body-transiparent- element which has been already kept in mind himself. 

However it is essential to keep in mind mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking all (28) kinds of corporealities, and then he has to keep each group of mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of those, three touching-elements thoroughly in mind continuously. After various places of body where hardness nature, hotness nature, supporting nature etc., are apparent must be kept in mind in order to see body-transparent-element, both that element and  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  must  be  kept  in  mind  simultaneously. Afterwards\_\_\_\_\_ mental ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind through taking objects of 

1. earth-element, 
1. fire-element, 
1. air-element  which  are  existing  in  corporeal  units  adjacent  to  that  body-transparent- element. 

The righteous ***meditator*** should like to discern mental ***dhammas*** through taking object of … 

1. the earth-element, 6x4 = 24 times; 
1. the fire-element, 6x4 = 24 times; 
1. the air-element, 6x4 = 24 times; 

**Brain and intelligence** 

The righteous ***meditator*** can analyze practically in this stage whether intelligence (= knowledge) arises in the brain or not. In the aspect of Buddha’s philosophy of ***Abhidhamma***, the brain is group of corporeal units only. In this stage if the righteous mediator scrutinizes four great elements at the brain, he can find corporeal units easily. Since in the stage of ***rūpakammaṭṭhāna*** he has already kept (5) kinds of corporeal units consisting (44) kinds of corporealities in mind thoroughly. Therefore the righteous ***meditator*** must keep those (44) kinds of corporealities, which are existing as ‘***anicca***’ nature, in mind again. 

**PAGE-191** 

1. Body-transparent-element and life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind simultaneously. 
1. Any kind of three elements, i.e., 
1) earth-element, 
1) fire-element, 
1) air-element, 

which are existing within a corporeal unit or numerous corporeal units adjacent to that body-transparent-element  must  be  taken  as  object.  Obvious  element  must  be  chosen specially. 

When  any  kind  of  those  touching-elements  impinges  on  both  body-transparent- element inside the brain and life-continuum mind-clear-element simultaneously, continuity of consciousness of body-door-cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive processes will arise successively. Then he must decide as earth-element or fire-element or air-element through five-doors-adverting, determining, mind-door-adverting consciousness which are consisting in those cognitive process. The mind-door-adverting consciousness consisting in mind-door- cognitive process, which take tactile-object continuously, must also determine that tactile- object as corporeal ***dhamma*** or as ***anicca***. Due to occurrence of wise attention, continuity of great wholesome impulsions will arise consequently. If each impulsion associates with both knowledge (= intelligence)  and pleasurable interest (***pīti***), those  are (34)  kinds of  mental ***dhammas*** which arise depending on heart-base only. The knowledge (= intelligence) can be found among those mental ***dhammas*** only but not (8) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** which arise depending on body-transparent within the brain. Those (8) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** are touching-consciousness,  contact,  feeling,  perception,  volition,  one-pointedness,  vitality, attention, but knowledge is lacking. The righteous ***meditator*** should like to scrutinize over and over practically whether this philosophy of ***Abhidhamma*** is correct or not. 

[Notes : \_\_\_\_\_ In this tactile-object line, if tactile-object is desirable one, touching consciousness associates with agreeable feeling; if tactile-object is undesirable one, touching- consciousness associates with disagreeable feeling.] 

Here it has been presented on ways of keeping wholesome group mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking objects of (28) kinds of corporealities in mind through dividing (6) kinds  i.e.,  visible-object  line,  audible-object  line,  olfactory-object  line,  sapid-object  line, tactile-object line, ***dhamma***-object line. These ways of keeping in mind are accomplished through brief account of four great elements method called base-door wise system If the righteous  ***meditator***  wants  to  discern  mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking  object  of corporeal ***dhammas*** which are discerned through detailed method of four great elements he has to perform continuously as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-192** 

Way of keeping mental ***dhammas*** through detailed account of four great elements method 

In the ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** volume 2, page 226, paragraph 670, it is instructed that… ***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-226)*** 

- Both mental ***dhammas*** led by ***phassapañcamaka dhamma*** (= ***dhamma*** with the 

contact as fifth factor) which arise by taking object of the earth-element consisting in (44) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** which are lying in bodily part called hair ***… R …***  

and mental ***dhammas*** led by ***phassa pañcamaka dhamma*** which arise by taking object of the earth-element consisting in (9) kinds, (12) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** which are lying in sound nonads by mind, dodecads with sound and agility etc, consisting in bodily part called in-breath, out-breath\_\_\_\_\_ 

must be kept in mind through any most apparent kind of three ways of keeping in mind, i.e., 

1) way of keeping contact in mind as beginning 
1) way of keeping feeling consciousness in mind as beginning, 
1) way  of  keeping  consciousness  in  mind  as  beginning;  This  way  of  instruction  is accomplished  through  the  preaching  methodology  called  ***upalakkhaṇa  naya, nidassana naya*** (= the method which gives a hint and remaining patterns must also be understood similarly). 

According to above instruction because there are (44) kinds of corporealities in bodily part called hair, mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of each corporeal ***dhamma*** occurring in those (44) kinds within hair must be discerned by following as mentioned (6) lines. For instance, visible-object (= colour) which is consisting in those (44) kinds must be discerned as shown in visible-object line and so forth. Those mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking objects of remaining corporealities occurring in various bodily parts must also be discerned in similar way. Among those corporeal ***dhammas*** remaining corporeal ***dhammas***, excluding  fivefold  objects,  visible-object  line,  are  designated  as  ***dhamma***-object.  Those ***dhamma***-objects must also be kept in mind as shown in way of discerning mental ***dhammas*** of ***dhamma***-object line. 

**To discern carefully\_\_\_\_\_** 

***“pathavīdhātu kakkhaļalakkheṇā”, (Vs-2-226)*** 

Because it is instructed to discern especially on those mental ***dhammas*** which arise  by  taking  object  of  each  specific  character  (***sabhāva  lakkhaṇa***)  of  various  corporeal ***dhammas***, such as nature of hardness of earth-element, nature of cohesion of water-element etc., the righteous ***meditator*** ought to discern especially on continuity of impulsions of mind- door-cognitive process which can take objects of specific characters of various corporeal ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-193** 

**9.  Way  of  keeping  abstinence  boundless  mental  *dhammas*  (*virati  appamaññā  nāma dhamma*) in mind** 

**9.A. Three kinds of abstinence mental concomitants** 

Now it will be present continuously on way of keeping mental ***dhammas*** which are associating with abstinence mental concomitants (***virati cetasika***). These abstinence mental concomitants take object of ***viramitabba vatthu*** (= bases which are deserving to abstain). These  ***viramitabba  vatthu***  and  ***vītikkamitabba  vatthu***  (=  bases  which  are  deserving  to commit) of abstinence mental concomitants are different from each other. 

In this case even though unwholesome deeds are encountered to be done, the act of abstaining from it is called “abstinence”. Those objects which must be abstained are different among  abstinence  mental concomitants. Therefore in the aspect of  mundane world those abstinence mental concomitants are unable to arise simultaneously within the same mind moment. 

Right speech (***sammā vācā***) is the nature of abstaining from verbal misdeed, even though the latter is encountered to be done. Right action (***sammākammanta***) is the nature of abstaining from bodily misdeed, even though the latter is encountered to be done. 

Right livelihood (***sammā ājīva***) is the nature of abstaining from wrong livelihood, even though the latter is encountered to be done. Thus due to occurrence of different objects which must be abstained, those three kinds of abstinence mental concomitants are unable to arise simultaneously within same mind moment. 

**9.B. Unwholesome deed (*ducarita*) and wrong livelihood (*durājīva*)** 

In the aspect of abstinence, there are two kinds of unwholesome deeds, i.e., bodily misdeed and verbal misdeed. If both kinds of misdeed are relating to livelihood, it is called wrong livelihood (***durājīva***). 

Those  bodily  misdeeds,  such  as  hunting,  fishing,  robbery,  sexual  misconduct  for money etc., are wrong livelihoods. 

Those  verbal  misdeeds,  such  as  unjustly  advocacy  for  livelihood,  instigation  of enmity, swearing, trivial utterance for livelihood etc., are wrong livelihoods. 

If  any  *bhikkhu*  commits  for  four  requisites,  such  as  giving  fruit,  flower,  medical treatment,  telling  fortunes  to  layman  and  laywoman  devotees,  those  actions  are  called ***kuladūsana***  (=  destroying  faith  of  relatives),  ***anesana***  (unlawful  searching  requisite), ***micchājīva*** (wrong livelihood). If *bhikkhu*s use four requisites which are obtained through those ***kuladūsana***, ***anesana***, ***micchājīva***, it is called wrong livelihoods. 

***kuladūsana*** \_\_\_\_\_ The firm faith which is strong belief on noble quality of Triple Gems and on action and consequence of action is real faith. If one commits misdeeds, such as giving fruit, flower, medical treatment, telling fortunes to layman and laywoman devotees with real faith, those devotees revere that *bhikkhu* resulting in destruction of real faith. It becomes non- real faith on noble quality of ***samghās***, ***suppaṭippaññā*** ( = practicing straight forwardly on noble eightfold path which is the course leading to deliverance from suffering of rounds of rebirth) etc., but reverence through misdeeds, giving fruit, flower etc. Thus those deeds, such as giving flower, fruit etc., are called ***kuladūsana***, due to occurrence of destruction of real faith of devotees. 

**PAGE-194** 

***anesana*** \_\_\_\_ If *bhikkhu*s search four requisites through giving fruit, flower, flattering to devotees, it is called ***anesana*** (unlawful searching requisites). 

***micchājīva***  \_\_\_\_\_\_  Those  kinds  of  misdeeds,  such  as  searching  four  requisites  through boasting in such way that one admitted having absorption, Path, Fruit ***dhammas***, ***nibbāna***, supra-mundane  ***dhamma***  without  attaining  those  ***dhammas***;  through  carrying  news  as courier; through unlawful requesting four requisites from devotees who are not relatives, who never invite to request four requisites; are called ***micchājīva*** (wrong livelihoods). 

In the aspect of monastic codes, using four requisites which are obtained through those  misdeeds,  ***kuladūsana***,  ***anesana***,  ***micchājīva***,  is  also  called  wrong  livelihood (***micchājīva***) for those *bhikkhu*s who commit misdeed. Those kinds of misdeeds, such as murder with hatred, going out on a hunt for big game, fishing, lying which are not relating to livelihood but as hobby, are only bodily misdeeds, verbal misdeed, but not wrong livelihood. 

**9.C  Right speech (*sammāvācā*)** 

There  are three  kinds of right speech, i.e., ***kathāsammāvācā***, ***cetanā*** ***sammāvācā***, ***viratisammāvācā***. 

1. The right speech which is relating to cause and results but free from fault is called ***kathasammāvācā*** (verbal right speech). 
1. The  volition  which  associates  with  any  kind  of  consciousness,  determining, impulsions of  Super-psychic  Knowledge,  great  wholesome impulsions,  great  mere functioning  impulsions,  which  are  factors  of  saying  those  right  speech  which  is relating to cause and result but free from fault, is called ***cetanā*** ***sammāvācā*** (volitional right speech). 
1. While such circumstance which is essential to lie is encountering, if one says correctly but abstaining from lying or if one keep silence without lying, those mind moments consist  of  the  nature  of  abstinence.  Only  that  nature  of  abstinence  is  called ***viratisammāvācā***  (=  abstinence  right  speech).  All  verbal  misdeeds  which  are deserving to abstain through this ***viratisammāvācā*** must not relate with livelihood. 

Therefore it should be recognized in brief that “the nature of abstinence from any kind of four verbal misdeeds, which are not relating with livelihood,” is called ***sammāvācā*** (right speech). 

**PAGE-195** 

During discerning these abstinence mental concomitants some ***meditator*** encountered difficulty. Those mental concomitants are kinds of mental concomitants which arise by taking object of present bases which are deserving to commit, such as other’s life, other’s property etc., which are called ***vītikkamitabbavatthu***. It is difficult to be discerned because during practicing the righteous ***meditator*** does not face with bases of misdeed which are deserving to commit. Therefore the righteous ***meditator*** has to discern by taking only kind of objects which has already abstained not to commit in past period. It should not be misunderstood the fact abstinence mental concomitants take past objects. It should be recognized only mental ***dhammas*** which arose by taking any kind of objects of misdeeds which had been abstained not to commit must be taken as object. 

In section of ***vīithimutta***, ***Abhidhammattha*** ***sanghaha*** one explanation that…. “***kammam pana atītameva, tañca manodvāraggahitam***”, 

- “object of past action ca be taken as object by present impulsions of mind-door-

cognitive processes,” can be found. 

Then another explanation can also be found in that section that… 

“***tameva  vā  pana  janakabhūtam  kammam  abhinavakaraṇavasena  dvārapattam hoti***.” 

- “definite action, which had been cultivated in past period, which will bring forth its 

result reached into the mind-door by means of reperforming again”. 

In  accordance  with  these  explanations  if  the  righteous  ***meditator***  takes  those  past objects of abstinence wholesome actions as object, those objects can appear in the present mind-door of himself. 

During appearing those objects of action, it appears through, 

1. either ‘***pubbekata saññā***’ 
1. or ‘***sampatikata*** ***saññā***’. 
1. The perception which has been done previously is called ***pubbekata*** ***saññā***. 
1. The  perception,  which  is  now  experienced  to  do  recently,  is  called  ***sampatikata*** ***saññā***. 

If joyful wholesome volition arose while one was abstaining verbal misdeed, lying etc., ability to remember or to take object of those group of mental ***dhammas*** which was predominant  with  those  wholesome  volition  again  is  accomplished  through  “***pubbekata*** ***saññā***.” 

Way of appearing through ***sampatikata*** ***saññā*** is as follows:\_\_\_ 

If one had experienced to abstain verbal misdeeds, lying etc., previously, when one takes object which has been abstained as object again that object reappears again in the mind- door as re-abstaining again. Mental ***dhammas*** together with abstinence mental concomitants will appear in the present mind-door of himself by means of re-performing again. At that time the righteous ***meditator*** can discern those group of mental ***dhammas*** easily. 

**PAGE-196** 

**Way of discerning on right speech** 

1. Develop concentration step by step. 
1. Life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind. 
1. Take any kind of objects which had been experienced to perform right speech as object. For instance \_\_\_ an object which has been abstained not to commit must be taken as object. 
1. When  that  object  appears  in  the  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  of  righteous ***meditator*** group of mental ***dhammas*** together with right speech must be 

kept in mind continuously. 

The next method of discerning 

1. Develop concentration step by step. 
1. Discern and keep in mind corporeality-mentality of present period as beginning until the period when right speech was experienced, for instance \_\_\_\_ until the period when lying was abstained not to say. 
1. Life-continuum  mind-clear-element  which  occurred  during  arising  of  right  speech must be kept in mind continuously. 
1. During  arising  of  that  right  speech  basing  on  life-continuum  mind-clear-element group of mental ***dhammas*** together with abstinence of lying (right speech) must be kept in mind continuously. 

He will be successful through any way of discerning. It should be understood similarly on right action (= ***sammākammanta***) and right livelihood (= ***sammā ājīva***). 

**(35) kinds of mental *dhammas*** 

During keeping in mind in that way continuity of mind moments will be 

1. (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** consisting in mind-door-adverting….(1) time, 
1. (35) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** consisting in each impulsion…. (7) times, 
1. (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** consisting in each registering….(2) times generally. Registering can fall or can not fall, resulting in saying as generally. 

(35) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** means previous faith-wisdom group of (34) mental 

***dhammas*** are added by ***sammāvācā*** (right speech) with the result that (35) in total. That abstinence  mental  concomitant  never  associate  with  consequence  mental  ***dhamma***, registering consequence etc. Therefore (34) mental ***dhammas*** are shown in registering mind moment with referring to great consequence registering with knowledge. It may associate either agreeable or neutrality feeling, with knowledge or without knowledge accordingly. Rootless  consequence  registering  are  also  available.  In  this  case  table  with  (4)  ways  of discerning  through  associating  with  knowledge,  pleasurable  interest  is  shown.  If  rootless consequence registering falls one can discern as it really falls. 

**PAGE-197** 

Table showing right speech (***sammāvācā***) mind-door-cognitive process 



|Depended bases within heart = 54 |54 |54 |54 |
| - | - | - | - |
|Mind-door-adverting |(7) times of impulsions |<p>(2) times of </p><p>registerings with root (or) </p>|<p>(2) times of </p><p>registering without root </p>|
|12 |35 |34 (or) |12/11 |
|12 |34 |33 (or) |11/11 |
|12 |34 |33 (or) |12/11 |
|12 |33 |32 (or) |11/11 |
Present  life-continuum  mid-clear-element  of  righteous  ***meditator***  and  past  life- continuum mind-clear-element when right speech (***sammāvācā***) arose are single continuity through the method of ***ekattanaya*** (= single method). If that past object when right speech arose is taken as object again, that object can appear in the present life-continuum mind- clear-element again as new one. At that time those mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking that object can be kept in mind easily. 

The righteous ***meditator*** has to discern right speech through 

1. taking object of abstaining from lying (four ways of discerning as shown in table); 
1. taking object of abstaining from making mischief….R….. 
1. taking object of abstaining from abusive language….R…… 
1. taking object of trivial utterance…..R…… 

In group of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsions and registerings\_\_\_\_ 

1) faith (***saddhā***) is nature of faith on action and consequence of action; 
1) wisdom (***paññā***) is nature of understanding on action and consequence of action. It is called right view on action and consequence of action (***kammassakatā*** ***sammā*** ***diṭṭhi***). 

**9.D. Way of discerning on right action** 

There are three kinds of right actions i.e.,  

1. ***kiriyā*** ***sammā*** ***kammanta*** (right bodily action), 
1. ***cetanā*** ***kammanta*** (volitional right action) 
1. ***virati*** ***sammākammanta*** (abstinence right action). 
1. Bodily action of a person who does a kind of function or work without fault, is called ***kiriyāsammākammanta***. 
1. The volition which is factor of performing that function or work without fault is called ***cetanā*** ***sammākammanta***. 
1. When possibility to do any kind of bodily misdeeds is encountered, if one abstains not to commit it, during abstaining in that way that nature of abstinence, whether any other bodily action is done or not, is called ***viratisammākammanta***. 

**PAGE-198** 

All  kinds  of  misdeeds,  which  are  worth  abstaining  through  this ***viratisammākammanta***, must not relating to livelihood. Therefore in this case, it should be recognized ***sammākammanta*** means nature of abstinence from bodily misdeeds which are not relating to livelihood. 

1. Develop concentration step by step. 
1. Life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind. 
1. Take  any  kind  of  objects  which  had been  experienced  to perform  right  action  as object. For instance \_\_\_ an object which has been abstained not to commit must be taken as object. 
1. When  that  object  appears  in  the  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  of  righteous ***meditator*** group of mental ***dhammas*** together with right action must be kept in mind continuously. 

If  (34)  mental ***dhammas***  of  faith-wisdom  group  within  each  impulsin added  with ‘***sammākammanta***’, it will be (35) mental ***dhammas*** within each impulsion as maximum range. Discern (4) ways through changing knowledge and pleasurable interest (***pīti***) which may be whether association or not. 

Table showing right action (***sammākammanta***) mind-door-cognitive process 



|Depended bases within heart = 54 |54 |54 |54 |
| - | - | - | - |
|Mind-door-adverting |(7) times of impulsions |<p>(2) times of </p><p>registerings with root (or) </p>|<p>(2) times of </p><p>registering without root </p>|
|12 |35 |34 (or) |12/11 |
|12 |34 |33 (or) |11/11 |
|12 |34 |33 (or) |12/11 |
|12 |33 |32 (or) |11/11 |
The righteous ***meditator*** has to discern right action through 

1. taking object of abstaining from killing other being (four ways of discerning as shown in table); 
1. taking object of abstaining from stealing other’s property ….R….. 
1. taking object of abstaining from sexual misconduct ….R… 

In this case, nature of faith and wisdom are also the same as shown in right speech. The next method of discerning can also be performed by following example shown in right speech. 

**9.E.  Right livelihood (*sammā ājīva*)** 

There are two kinds of right livelihood, i.e., 

1. ***vīriya*** ***sammā ājīva*** and 
1. ***virati*** ***sammā*** ***ājīva***. 
1. Right endeavouring called ***sammāvāyama*** which are arising in various moments, such as during harrowing, trading, weaving, going alms food etc., of those persons who harrow,  trade,  weave  as  traditionally  for  layman  devotees  and  for  *bhikkhu*s  who search four requisites without mixing with ***kuladūsana***, ***anesana***, ***micchājīva*** but in accordance with the monastic codes allowed by the Exalted One, are called ***vīriya*** ***sammā ājīva*** (diligent right livelihood).  

**PAGE-199** 

2. If verbal misdeeds, bodily misdeeds which are shown in section of right speech, right action, arise in one’s continuum through relating to livelihood, for instance \_\_\_\_\_ unjustly advocacy for livelihood, bribery for livelihood, hunting fishing in the aspect of layman devotees, in the aspect of *bhikkhu*s, if one uses four requisites which are gained  through ***kuladūsana***,  ***anesana*** ***micchājīva***,  those  are  wrong  livelihood \_\_\_ however if he abstains those misdeeds at one time, it is called ***viratisammā*** ***ājīva*** (abstinence right livelihood). In this section of ***virati***, this abstinence right livelihood is worth desiring. It should, therefore, be recognized ***sammā ājīva*** means nature of abstinence from bodily misdeeds, verbal misdeed which are relating to livelihood. 

Furthermore in the aspect of worldly people, it is preached in ***Vaṇijjā*** ***Sutta*** (Ang-2- 183) that there are five kinds of trading which must not be done for devotees who take refuges upon Triple Gems, i.e.,  

1. ***sattha*** ***vaṇijjā*** = weapon trading, 
1. ***satta*** ***vaṇijjā*** = human trading, 
1. ***mamsa*** ***vaṇijjā*** = animal husbandry trading, 
1. ***majja*** ***vaṇijjā*** = intoxicating drinks and narcotic trading, 
1. ***visa*** ***vaṇijjā*** = poison trading.  

The nature of abstinence from using properties which are obtained through those five kinds of trading is also called right livelihood. 

In the aspect of *bhikkhu*s, the nature of abstinence from using four requisites which are obtained through ***kuladūsana***, ***anesana***, ***micchājīva***, is also right livelihood. 

**Way of discerning on right livelihood** 

1. Life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind. 
1. Take any kind of objects which had been experienced to perform right livelihood as object. 

For instance \_\_\_\_ take object of nature of abstinence from eating fertile egg fried which is done for oneself and due to knowing about it really. 

3. When  that  object  appears  in  the  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  continuity  of impulsions, including right livelihood, of mind-door-cognitive processes must be kept in mind continuously. 

If each impulsion is added with right livelihood, it will be consisting of (35/34/34/33) mental ***dhammas*** according to association with or without association  of knowledge  and pleasurable interest respectively. Remaining facts are the same as previous mentioned. 

**PAGE-200** 

Table showing right livelihood (***sammā ājīva***) mind-door-cognitive process 



|Depended bases within heart = 54 |54 |54 |54 |
| - | - | - | - |
|Mind-door-adverting |(7) times of impulsions |<p>(2) times of </p><p>registerings with root (or) </p>|<p>(2) times of </p><p>registering without root </p>|
|12 |35 |34 (or) |12/11 |
|12 |34 |33 (or) |11/11 |
|12 |34 |33 (or) |12/11 |
|12 |33 |32 (or) |11/11 |
**9.F  General knowledge relating to *virati* (abstinence)** 

Here it will be presented on opinions of olden day teachers as found in commentary called ***Aṭṭhasālinī***, page-146 etc., in order to understand profoundly way of discerning on mental concomitants called ***virati*** (abstinence). 

There are three varieties of abstinence, viz., 

1. ***sampatta virati***, 
1. ***samādāna*** ***virati***, 
3. ***samuccheda*** ***virati***. 

\1.  ***sampatta*** ***virati*** ***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Abhi***-***A-1-146***) 

Among  those  three  kinds,  the  nature  of  abstinence  (***virati***)  which  arises  in  the continuum of persons who do not commit the object (=bases), which is deserving to commit, which reaches into the circumstance to be done, through deciding in a way that…. 

“This kind of utterly despicable misdeed is not worth doing for great gentleman like ourselves”\_\_\_\_ 

After bearing in mind on gentleness of caste, elderly nobility, completion with general knowledge etc., of those persons who do not observe precepts, 

is called “***sampattavirati***”; it should be known in this way. According to these words, an  abstinence  from  object  which  is  deserving  to  commit,  without  observing  precept previously is called ***sampatta*** ***virati*** (meeting by chance abstinence). 

Cakkana devotee\_\_\_\_ 

Once there was a gentle devotee called Cakkana in Sri Lanka. His mother had got a disease since that devotee’s childhood. The practitioner of indigenous medicine said fresh meat of rabbit was suitable diet for sick mother. At that time Cakkana’s elder brother him to got into stretch of paddy field and search for rabbit meat. 

**PAGE-201** 
PAGE41
