***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**SECTION OF *NĀAMAKAMMAŢŢHĀNA*** 

(**PRACTICE ON MENTALITY**) **VOLUME II**  

**Page 51 - 100** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**&** 

**Dr. Khin Maung Aye (Ph.D, Messey)** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiţakadhara*)** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE39

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE-51** 

However\_ in accordance with the ancestry ways of teaching traditionally, this work applies the terms for two times of life-continuum (vibration) through  

1. designating as life-continuum (vibration) for first one and 
1. designating as life-continuum (cessation) for second one respectively. 

**M (xv) *diţţhe diţţhamattam*** 

These words mentioned above that “if the mere functioning mind-element called five- doors adverting causes to rotate the life-continuum, resulting in stopping, the continuity of life-continuum; after cessation of life-continuum by five-doors-adverting, there is impossible the fact continuity of consciousness of cognitive process will fall into life-continuum again without reaching into determining consciousness which determines the object as desirable or undesirable one etc., at the interval between five-doors-adverting and determining, i.e.,  

1. either seeing-consciousness, 
1. receiving-consciousness or 
1. investigating-consciousness.  (***Abhi-A-1-309,  310***)  are  deserving  to  recognize especially for those virtuous practicing persons who want to practice the ***vipassanā*** discerning called “***diţţhe*** ***diţţhamattam***”. 

In  those  eye-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door-cognitive  process  which  takes visible-object continuously the ***dhamma*** which performs the function of seeing visible-object is seeing-consciousness. 

* ***ekantena pana cakkhuviññāņameva  dassana kiccam sādheti. (Abhi-A-1-320)*** 

The righteous ***meditator*** ought not consider wrongly on the fact relating to “mind must be put mere seeing”, according to the words “***diţţhe*** ***diţţhamattam***”. If one considers the fact “mind must be put mere seeing” as “one must try not to arise minds on that visible-object again but seeing merely”, it has the same meaning with the fact one must try not to arise consciousness of cognitive process after seeing-consciousness again. Actually, no one cannot practice  so  as  not  to  arise  successive  consciousness  of  cognitive  process  after  seeing- consciousness. It is because continuity of consciousness of cognitive process never cease without reaching until at least determining-consciousness. 

The righteous ***meditator*** should like to consider above explanation of commentary. Even though the Exalted One can not practice so as not to arise consciousness of cognitive process after seeing-consciousness, due to no one can not overcome rules of ***Abhidhamma***. 

The essence of ***diţţhe*** ***diţţhamattam*** is as follows:\_\_\_ 

1. Due to deserving to see, the visible-object is called ***diţţha***. 
1. Due to ability to see that visible-object, both mental ***dhammas*** which are occurring in that  eye-door,  including  seeing-consciousness  and  mental  ***dhammas***  which  are occurring in mind-door cognitive process, which take that visible-object continuously, are also called ***diţţha***. 

**PAGE-52** 

If one discerns and keep in mind those ***diţţha*** ***dhammas*** together with depended bases and then he performs ***vipassanā*** discerning on those ***dhammas*** which are deserving to see and ***dhammas*** which are able to see through three  general  characters called ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***  alternately,  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  can  abandon  lust,  anger,  delusion  which  are attaching and covering on those ***diţţha*** ***dhammas*** temporarily. The Noble Path ***dhammas*** which arise at the end of ***vipassanā*** knowledge will eradicate lust, anger, delusion absolutely. It means one must practice so as not to arise lust, anger, delusion depending on those ***diţţha*** ***dhammas*** together with causal ***dhammas***. Way of discerning in detail will be presented later. ***(See.. Bāhiya Sutta, Udāna-A-81, 82)*** 

**M (xvi) *atiparittārammaņa vīthi*** 

The visible-object, which is unable to exist until registering; which ceases before five- doors-adverting consciousness causes to cease continuity of life-continuum, even though it appears  in  eye-door,  mind-door;  which  has  got  very  short  life  span  with  a  few  mind- moments,  due  to  very  weak  occurrence  of  object,  is  called  ***atiparittārammaņa***.  In  this cognitive process life-continuum vibrates only, but not arising of consciousness of cognitive process.  This  ***vāra***  is  termed  as  ***moghavāra***  in  ***Abhidhammattha***  ***Sangaha***,  while  first ***moghavāra*** in the commentary called ***Atthasālinī*** (***Abhi-A-1-309***). 

Due to voidness of consciousness of cognitive process, this ***vāra*** is designated as ***moghavāra***. 

As ***vīthi*** called ***visayappavatti*** (arising of objects) varies four kinds in eye-door, viz., 

1. ***atimahantārammaņa*** ***vīthi*** called ***tadārammaņavāra***, 
1. ***mahantārammaņa*** ***vīthi*** called ***javanavāra***, 
1. ***parittārammaņa*** ***vīthi*** called ***voţţhabbana*** ***vāra***, 
1. ***atiparittārammaņa*** ***vīthi*** called ***moghavāra***, 

It  should  be  recognized  similarly  on  remaining  ear-door,  nose-door,  tongue-door, body-door. This is how consciousness of cognitive process arise in fivefold doors. 

There are two varieties of objects,  

1. ***vibhūtārammaņa*** (obvious object), 
1. ***avibhūtārammaņa*** (unobvious object) in the mind-door. 
* ***vibhūtanti supākaţam, (Mahāţī-2-133)*** 
- Obvious object in mind (=mind-door) is called ***vibhūtārammaņa*** while unobvious 

object is called ***avibhūtārammaņa***. 

In obvious ***vibhūtārammaņa*** ***vīthi***, there are three kinds of consciousness,:  

1. mind-door-adverting….. (1) time, 

**PAGE-53** 

2. impulsion……(7) times, 
2. registering……(2) times, 

totally (10) times in numbers of consciousness of cognitive process. 

If  it  is  ***avibhūtārammaņa***,  life-continuum  falls  at  the  end  of  impulsions.  It  is impossible to arise registering. In that cognitive process, 

1. mind-door-adverting…..(1) time, 
1. impulsions…… (7) times generally. 

These  are  (6)  kinds  of  ***visayappavatti***  by  which  sensuous  impulsions  called ***parittajavana*** ***vāra*** fall. 

In  ***appanājavanavāra***,  however,  there  is  no  variation  as  ***vibhūta***  (obvious)  and ***avibhūta***  (unobvious).  It  is  impossible  to  fall  registering  also.  (See  tables  of ***nāmakammaţţhāņa***.) 

These are six-hexads (6x6) ***dhammas*** which are deserving to be understood before hand for practicing persons who want to perform ***nāmakammaţţhāņa*** as beginner. 

**N. Analyzing on mental *dhammas*, discerned object of *vipassanā* knowledge** 

Mental ***dhammas*** which are deserving to discern as object of ***vipassanā*** knowledge \_\_\_\_ It has been explained previously the fact in this section of ***nāmakammaţţhāņa*** mental ***dhammas*** which are deserving to discern for practicing persons are mundane consciousness and  mental  concomitants  only.  Among  those  ***dhammas***,  absorption  ***dhammas***  can  be included for those persons with absorptions but absorption ***dhammas*** are no need to discern for others who have not got absorptions. 

Those  mental  ***dhammas***  always  arise  either  ***vīthimutta***  ***citta***  (free  from  cognitive process)  called  ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum,  death-consciousness  or  continuity  of consciousness of cognitive process called ***vīthicitta*** in accordance with fixed law of mind (***cittaniyama***) in nature. It is natural fixed route of mind which never change and which can not be accommodated into other route. Every practicing ***meditator*** who wants to perform ***nāmakammaţţhāņa*** must try to see those mental ***dhammas*** which arise through natural fixed route by penetrative knowledge. 

In the commentary called ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** it is explained that disciples must discern and keep in mind consciousness and mental concomitants which arise through natural fixed route of mind called ***vīthi*** (=cognitive process) and continuities of unwholesome impulsions of cognitive processes thoroughly as follows:\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-54** 

**N (i) Explanation of *Visuddhi* *Magga arūpanibbattipassanākāra* *Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-252, 253)* 3 paragraph*** 

The essence of this commentary is as follows:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

Furthermore \_\_\_\_\_\_ as the arising nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** is worth discerning by practicing ***meditator*** who discerns corporeal ***dhammas***, similarly \_\_\_\_\_ the practicing ***meditator***, who discerns mental ***dhammas***, ought to discern the arising nature called ***nibbatti lakkhaņā***  of  mental  ***dhammas***.  During  discerning  the  arising  nature  of  those  mental ***dhammas*** it is worth discerning by means of arising of (81) kinds of mundane mind-moments (***lokiya*** ***cittuppāda***). 

What the ***vipassanā*** which discerns by means of these mundane consciousness and mental concomitants is that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

During ***paţisandhi*** (= the process of newly occurrence of next existence, NONE) any kind of arising of mind-moments with (19) varieties of ***paţisandhi*** arises appropriately for various  existences  through  performing  function  of  ***paţisandhi***,  due  to  presence  of  action called ***kamma*** which had been cultivated in previous existences. The phenomenon of arising of that ***paţisandhi*** mental ***dhamma*** will be obvious in the Section of Dependent-Origination. 

Among those (19) kinds of ***paţisandhi***-consciousness only one kind of consciousness performs function of ***paţisandhi*** for a single existence of each being. 

**N (i) Function of *paţisandhi*** \_\_\_\_ According to explanation, ***paţisandhānam paţisandhi***, the connection of cause to connect is called ***paţisandhi***. Just after cessation of former existence the first arising of consciousness for new coming-into-existence is a connection between old existence and new one. In other words\_\_\_ by the time continuity of corporeality, continuity of mentality, continuity of corporeality-mentality of old existence cease these processes, i.e., arising of corporeal ***dhammas***, arising of mental ***dhammas***, arising of corporeality-mentality, occur at new existence previously. That previous arising consciousness called ***paţisandhi*** at new  existence  occur  as  connection  between  former  existence  and  new  one  so  as  to  be continuous. Due to presence of connecting function in that way the continuity of aggregates called being cycles without ceasing again and again. Thus the nature of connection between old existence and new coming-into-existence is designated as function of ***paţisandhi***. 

***bhavanga* (life-continuum)- *cuti*** 

(death)\_\_\_\_\_\_  The  next  consciousness  which  is  the  same  as  the  consciousness,  which performs function of ***paţisandhi***, arises contiguous after ***paţisandhi***-consciousness by means of life-continuum. At the termination of life it arises by means of death. 

**N (ii) Function of life-continuum \_\_\_\_\_\_** 

* ***bhavassa angam bhavangam.*** 
- The  consciousness  which  is  fundamental  factor  of  incessant  arising  of  coming-into- existence called ***upapattibhava*** is called ***bhavanga*** (= life-continuum). In one coming-into- existence the beginning consciousness is called ***paţisandhi***, while the last one, ***cuti*** (death). The interval between those ***paţisandhi*** and death is called ***upapattibhava*** (during coming- into-existence). It is ***upapattibhava*** found in the preaching of dependent-origination (***paţicca*** ***samuppāda***).  According  to  explanation,  “***kammato  upapajjatīti  upapatti***”,  the  term, ***upapattibhava***  means  mundane  consequence  mental  aggregates  produced  by  ***kamma***  and corporealities produced by ***kamma*** called ***kammajarūpa***. 

At the cessation of previous existence ***paţisandhi***-consciousness connects with new coming-into-existence  contiguously  and  then  unless  consequence  consciousness  arise continuously, one life will be terminated, due to cessation of continuity of consciousness just after ***paţisandhi*** consciousness contiguously. The continuity of consequence consciousness, therefore, continues to arise incessantly, so as not to terminate the life in that way, through efficiency  of  action  which  brings  forth  its  consequence.  Afterwards  continuity  of consciousness of cognitive processes arise depending on and taking on objects which strike respective  doors  during  life  called  ***pavatti***.  While  those  continuities  of  consciousness  of cognitive processes are ceasing, unless  consequence consciousness called life-continuums arise  successively,  ***cittajarūpa***  (corporealities  produced  by  mind)  and  ***kammaja***  ***rūpa*** (corporealities produced by ***kamma***) will cease, due to cessation of continuity of mind. The consequence  consciousness  which  is  capable  of  connecting  continuity  of  aggregates throughout life whenever the efficiency of ***kamma*** is available, is designated as ***bhavanga*** (=life-continuum),  due  to  occurrence  of  essential  consciousness  which  is  the  source  of incessant arising of ***upapattibhava***. It is the same as ***paţisandhi***-consciousness and it is also produced by efficiency of action called ***kamma*** of previous life. 

Among  those  (19)  kinds  of  consciousness  which  can  carry  out  functions  of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death, sensual ***paţisandhi*** (10) kinds called (8) kinds of great consequence  consciousness  (***mahāvipāka***  ***citta***)  and  (2)  kinds  of  neutral  investigating consciousness (***upekkhāsantīraņa*** ***citta***) can arise by taking strong objects in (6) doors by means of efficiency of registering (***tadārammaņa***) also. 

Furthermore,  during  life  in  the  continuum  of  a  being  with  intact  eye-transparent- element the seeing-consciousness arises together with associating mental concomitants, due to impingement of visible-object on the eye-transparent-element, due to occurrence of intact nature  of  eye-transparent-element,  through  depending  on  light  (***āloka***)  and  attention  of fundamental of cognitive process (***vīthipaţipādaka*** ***manasikāra***) called five-doors-adverting consciousness which can accommodate visible-object. 

It  will be  explicit \_\_\_  During  reaching  into  the  static phase  after  arising  of  eye- transparent-element the visible-object, which reaches into just static phase after arising phase, strikes on the eye-transparent-element. When it strikes on eye-transparent-element, two times of life=continuums arise successively and cease. (It means life-continuum (vibration) and life-continuum (cessation) arise successively and cease.) 

**PAGE-56** 

Afterwards,  mere  functioning  mind-element  called  five-doors-adverting consciousness arises through finishing the function of adverting that visible-object. (1) 

Contiguous  after  that  five-doors-adverting  the  seeing-consciousness,  which  is wholesome  consequence  or  unwholesome  consequence,  which  is  capable  of  seeing  that visible-object arises. (If that visible-object is desirable one, wholesome consequence but if visible-object is undesirable one, unwholesome consequence seeing-consciousness will arise respectively.) (2) 

Then  consequence  mind-element  called  receiving-consciousness  (***sampaţicchana***) arises after seeing-consciousness. (3) 

Then  rootless  consequence  mind-consciousness-element  called  investigating consciousness arises after receiving consciousness. (4) 

Then  rootless  mere  functioning  mind-consciousness-element  consciousness  with neutrality  feeling  (***ahetuka  kiriyā  manoviññāņa  dhātu  upekkhā  sahagata***  ***citta***)  called determining  (***vuţţho***)  which  is  capable  of  determining  that  visible-object  as  desirable  or undesirable one etc., arises after receiving-consciousness. (5) 

After determining-consciousness any one of three kinds of impulsions, viz.,  

1. sensuous wholesome impulsions, 
1. unwholesome impulsions 
1. sensuous mere functioning impulsions (***kāmāvacara kiriyā javana***) arise (5) times or 

(7) times with forcefully and successively. (In the continuum of worldly persons and fulfilling  persons,  if  that  determining  consciousness  is  wise-attention,  wholesome impulsions  fall;  if  determining  consciousness  is  unwise-attention,  unwholesome impulsions fall. In the continuum of *Arahants* sensuous mere functioning impulsions (***kāmāvacara kiriyājavana***) fall.) (6) 

It  should  be  recognized  the  fact  if  impulsions  are  unable  to  arise,  due  to  weak occurrence of object, two times of determining consciousness, first and second determining arise and life-continuum falls again. If impulsions are able to arise, due to occurrence of powerful object\_\_\_\_ 

Among (11) kinds of consequence consciousness which are capable of performing function of registering, i.e., (3) kinds of investigating consciousness and (8) kinds of great consequence  consciousness  for  sensual  beings,  any  kind  of  registering  consequence consciousness which conforms with impulsion and object arise randomly after cessation of impulsions. (7) 

**N (iv) Impulsion (*javana*) and object (*ārammaņa*) *Pāli Quotation (Mahāţī-2-405)*** 

[In recent manuscript of ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** it shows “***javanānurūpam (Vs-2-253)***. In above  ***Mahāţīkā***,  however,  it  shows  “***javanārammaņānurūpam***”.  In  the  translation  of commentary  called  ***Visuddhi***  ***Magga***,  translated  by  ***Pyi  Sayadaw***,  it  also  shows “***javanārammaņanurūpam***”. The essence of that sub-commentary is as follows:\_ 

If  the  impulsion  is  associated  with  three  roots  greedlessness,  hatelessness,  non- delusion,  the  registering  consciousness  will  associate  with  either  three  roots  called greedlessness,  hatelessness,  non-delusion  or  two  roots,  greedlessness,  hatelessness,  thus registering arises conformly with impulsion, or 

If the object is desirable one, the impulsion associates with joyful feeling, resulting in arising of registering also together with joyful feeling; thus registering arises conformly with with object; it means in this way.] 

It should be understood similarly on remaining doors, ear-door etc. In the mind-door, however, not only above impulsions, wholesome impulsions, unwholesome impulsions, mere functioning impulsions but lofty absorption impulsions (***mahaggata jhāna javana***) also arise. 

Thus the phenomena of arising of mental ***dhammas*** in (6) doors must be discerned so as to see ultimate nature penetratively. ***(Vs-2-252, 253)*** 

These are reliable evidences which instruct to discern mental ***dhammas*** so as to see continuity of cognitive process in (6) doors. During discerning impulsions worldly persons and fulfilling persons must discern both wholesome impulsions and unwholesome impulsions which arise depending on wise-attention or unwise-attention accordingly. Mere functioning impulsions, however, can arise in the continuum of *Arahant* only.  Furthermore \_\_\_ it is noticeable fact the commentary called ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** instructs to discern consciousness which  are  free  from  cognitive  process  called  ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum,  death- consciousness. 

During discerning in that way, because it is instructed that  “***saddhim sampayutta*** ***dhammehi***  =  associating  mental  concomitants  ***dhammas***  must  also  be  discerned”  \_\_\_  it should be recognized both mental ***dhammas*** which arise through fixed route of mind and mental ***dhammas*** occurring within life-continuums which are free from cognitive process must  be  kept  in  mind  by  breaking  down  each  compactness  of  mentality  of  every  mind moment penetratively. 

If any righteous ***meditator*** does not satisfy on explanations found in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** yet,  he  should  like  to  read  continuously  on  explanations  found  in  commentary  for ***Mahāsatipaţţhāna Sutta*** etc., as follows:\_\_\_ 

**N (v) *Mūla pariññā*** 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-266, 267, Dī-A-1-174; Sam-A-3-226, 227, Abhi-A-2-341)* PAGE-58** 

***(M-ţī-1-360)*** 

The  essence  of  exegesis  of  above  commentaries  and  sub-commentary  is  as 

follows:\_\_\_ 

One  should  be  understood  in  this  way  on  how  ***asammohasampajañña***  (=  clear comprehension with non-delusion) arise during looking straight forwardly and askance by means of ***mūlapariññā***.\_\_\_\_ 

During seeing visible-object, after eye-door-cognitive process many life-continuum fall and then many mind-door-cognitive process arise frequently. Those consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process not only know desirable object, undesirable object etc., but also bring forth attachment on desirable one or anger on undesirable one. It means if he takes into heart that visible-object wrongly, attachment, anger etc., can arise. If he pays wise-attention on  that  visible-object  in  proper  ways,  wholesome  impulsions  will  fall  accordingly.  The sources  of  arising  of  those  consciousness  of  mind-door-cognitive  processes,  due  to  all consciousness of five-door-cognitive processes, eye-door-cognitive process etc., which takes visible-object etc., and life-continuums. 

Full  understanding  in  continuity  of  impulsions  of  five-doors-cognitive  processes which  are  sources  of  arising  of  continuity  of  those  impulsions  of  mind-door-cognitive processes is called ***mūlapariññā*** (= full understanding on the source). One must understand how ***asammoha sampajañña*** arise by means of that ***mūlapariññā*** as follows:\_\_\_ 

Seven kinds of consciousness, viz., (1) life-continuum (2) five-doors-adverting (3) seeing-consciousness called  “***dassana***” (4) receiving (5) investigating (6) determining (7) impulsions arise successively. 

Among those (7) kinds, the life-continuum arises through accomplishing the function of incessant arising of continuity of consciousness of ***upapattibhava***; the five-doors-adverting consciousness arises through accomplishing function of accommodating visible-object after causing  to  stop  that  life-continuum;  Due  to  cessation  of  that  five-door-adverting consciousness, the seeing-consciousness arises through accomplishing the function of seeing; Afterwards  receiving-consciousness  called  consequence  mind-element  arises  through accomplishing  the  function  of  receiving  visible-object;  then  investigating-consciousness which is consequence mind-consciousness-element arises through accomplishing the function of  investigating  visible-object.  Just  after  cessation  of  that  investigating-consciousness determining-consciousness  which  is  mere  functioning  mind-consciousness-element  arises through  accomplishing  the  function  of  determining  on  visible-object  as  desirable  one, undesirable one etc. Then (7) times of impulsions arise forcefully and successively. 

**PAGE-59** 

Among those (7) times of impulsions, looking straight forwardly and askance does not arise by means of attachment, anger, delusion as “this person is woman, this person is man” etc., during the first impulsion ….R…. the second impulsion also ….R… the seventh impulsion, too. 

As  soldiers  at  battlefield,  when  those  (7)  times  of  impulsions  fall  by  means  of contrariwise  and  upside  down  looking  straight  forwardly  and  askance  arise by  means  of attachment, anger, delusion as “this person is woman; this person is man” etc. \_\_\_ Thus it should be recognized previously on “***asammohasampajañña*** (= clear comprehension with non-delusion) by means of ***mūlapariññā***. ***(M-A-1-266, 267, Dī-A-1-174; Sam-A-3-226, 227, Abhi-A-2-341)*** 

In  those  five-doors-cognitive  processes,  eye-door-cognitive  process  etc.,  if determining done by five-doors-adverting and determining-consciousness is unwise-attention, the attachment on desirable object or the anger on undesirable object of woman, man can arise by means of that determining. However those consciousness of five-doors-cognitive processes  are  unable  to  realize  as  “this  person  is  woman;  this  person  is  man”  etc.  The attachment does not arise through realizing as “this person is woman; this person is man”. The anger also does not arise through that way. It is attachment and anger on colour only. Successive arising consciousness of mind-door-cognitive processes which are separated by life-continuums after five-doors-cognitive processes, can realize as “woman, man” etc. Due to ability to realize in that way, attachment, anger, as “this person is woman, this person is man” etc., arise in those consciousness of mind-door-cognitive processes only. The continuity of consciousness with attachment, anger etc., in that way is only consciousness of mind-door- cognitive  processes.  The  source  of  those  mind-door-cognitive  processes  is,  really, consciousness of eye-door-cognitive process. If one can see penetratively on those continuity of consciousness of eye-door-cognitive process together with associating ***dhammas*** up to the field  of  ultimate  nature,  ***asammohasampajañña***  arises  in  him.  This  is  how ***asammohasampajañña*** arises during looking straight forwardly and askance by means of ***mūlapariññā***. These evidences are also instructions found in scriptures which show the fact during discerning mental ***dhammas*** each mind moment existing in fixed route of mind called ***cittaniyama*** must be kept in mind thoroughly. 

**N (vi) The next method of explanation** 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-267, 268, Dī-A-1-175; Sam-A-3-227; Abhi-A-2-342)*** 

In this way of discerning through five aggregates method \_\_\_\_ 

1. the eye-transparent-element and visible-object are corporeal aggregate; 
1. seeing-consciousness  which  is  capable  of   seeing  visible-object,  is  consciousness aggregate; 

**PAGE-60** 

3. the feeling (***vedanā***) which associates with seeing-consciousness is feeling aggregate; 
3. the  perception  (***saññā***)  which  associates  with  seeing-consciousness  is  perception aggregate; 
3. the contact, volition, one-pointedness, ***vīta***lity, intention which associates with seeing- consciousness is formations aggregate. 

Thus if coincidence of these five aggregates is available, looking straight forwardly and askance arise apparently. During looking straight forwardly and askance in that way who looks straight forwardly? Who looks askance? There is neither the person who looks straight forwardly nor the person who looks askance. It is only coincidence of five aggregates. ***(M-A- 1-267, 268, Dī-A-1-175; Sam-A-3-227; Abhi-A-2-342)*** 

When  one  can  distinguish  how  five  aggregates  arise  apparently  within  seeing- consciousness  during  looking  straight  forwardly  and  askance  in  this  way ***asammohasampajañña***  arises  in  him.  However  seeing-consciousness  is  unable  to  arise without five-door-adverting previously. Then when five-doors-adverting-consciousness can cause  to  cease  life-continuums  there  is  impossible  to  fall  life-continuum  again  without reaching until determining-consciousness really. (***Abhi-A-1-30  , 310***) 

If the visible-object is ***atimahantārammaņa***, (7) times of impulsions and (2) times of registering-consciousness  will  arise  successively.  Therefore  \_\_  as  five  aggregates  arise apparently during seeing-consciousness mind-moment \_\_\_\_ similarly 

1. during five-doors-adverting ………..   (5) aggregates 
1. during seeing-consciousness………..   (5) aggregates 
1. during receiving-consciousness……..  (5) aggregates 
1. during investigating-consciousness….   (5) aggregates 
1. during determining-consciousness……   (5) aggregates 
1. during each impulsion………………..  (5) aggregates 
1. during each registering consciousness ….  (5) aggregates 

arise in each mind moment respectively. If one can keep those (5) aggregates in mind so as to reach the field of ultimate nature as they really are, ***asammohasampajañña*** arises during looking straight forwardly and askance in his continuum. It should, therefore, be recognized those words of explanations, how five aggregates arise during seeing-consciousness, found in the  commentary  is  accomplished  through  ***upalakkhaņa***  method,  ***nidassana***  method  (= preaching methodology by which a hint is given for all necessary facts.) 

Five aggregates during five-doors-adverting mind moment \_\_\_\_ 

1. depended  heart-base  of  five-doors-adverting  and  visible-object  are  corporeal aggregate; 
1. five-doors-adverting consciousness is consciousness aggregate; 
1. the  perception,  which  associates  with  five-doors-adverting  consciousness,  is perception aggregate; 
1. the  feeling,  which  associates  with  five-doors-adverting  consciousness,  is  feeling aggregate; 
1. the these (8) mental ***dhammas*** i.e., ***phassa, cetanā, ekaggatā, jīvīta, manasikāra, vitakka,  vicāra,  adhimokkha***,  which  associates  with  five-doors-adverting consciousness, are formations aggregate; 

Thus  every  mind  moment  includes  five  aggregates.  It  should  be  understood  on remaining consciousness of cognitive process in similar way. 

These are evidence showing mental ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind through fixed route of mind systematically, and are excerpts from scriptures. 

**N (vii) Very difficult way of practice** 

Actually it is very difficult way of practice to keep mental ***dhammas*** in mind through breaking down compactness of mentality so as to reach the field of ultimate reality. However disciples can discern mental ***dhammas*** up to the ultimate nature. Due to misunderstanding on sayings found in Pāli Text of ***Milinda pañha***, some consider that disciples are unable to discern those mental ***dhammas***. It will be presented on explanations of commentary called ***Aţţhasālinī*** and Pāli Text of ***Milinda pañha*** as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-a-1-186, 187; Milindapañha-94)*** 

The essence of above Pāli Text and commentary is as follows:\_\_\_\_\_\_ **PAGE-62** 

The  Exalted  One  who  shows  nomenclature  of  various  mental  ***dhammas***  ***phassa, vedanā, saññā, cetana, viññāņa*** etc., through analyzing each ***dhamma*** with contact as the fifth  factor  (***phassapañcanmaka  dhamma***)  which  are  existing  in  one  mind  moment  had accomplished very difficult work. It will be explicit by taking examples. 

Let us suppose…. Various kinds of water with manifold colours, smells, tastes are put in a cup and stirred throughout day. Let us suppose…various kinds of oils, ground nut oil, sesame oil, oil produced by pig fat etc., with various colours, smells, tastes are put in a cup and stirred throughout day. It might be possible to perform in order to discriminate significant specific nature of either various kinds of water or various kinds of oils, due to presence of specific nature of colour, smell, taste, through seeing by eye or smelling by nose or licking by tongue. 

[Water  means,  oil  means  groups  of  corporeal  units  which  are  predominated  with water-element, due to presence of nature of corporeality as corporeal units. Due to occurrence of  dissociated  ***dhammas***  (***vipayutta  dhamma***),  corporeal  ***dhammas***  which  are  existing  in different corporeal units never associate with each other. Therefore for those persons with eye of wisdom it might be possible to perform in order to discriminate significant specific nature of either various kinds of water or various kinds of oils, due to presence of specific nature of colour, smell, taste, through seeing by eye or smelling by nose or licking by tongue. It means in this way.] 

Even though it is possible to know in this way, Venerable ***Nāgasena Mahā Thero*** said  that  it  is  very  difficult  work  to  know  that  way  in  Pāli  Text  of ***Milindapañha***.  The Perfectly Enlightened One showed that nomenclature of each mental ***dhamma***, i.e., 

“This is contact, this is feeling, this is perception, this is volition, this is consciousness” etc., which are occurring within one mind moment by taking single object, through discriminating specific nature of each consciousness and mental ***dhamma*** individually. The Exalted One who  showed  nomenclature  of  each  mental  ***dhamma***  in  that  way  had  accomplished  very difficult work really. 

**PAGE-63** 

[One mind moment of impulsion of mind-door-cognitive process called the first great wholesome  consciousness  consists  (34)  mental  ***dhammas***,  due  to  associating  with  both knowledge and pleasurable interest (***pīti***). Those consciousness and mental concomitants have got  four  kinds  of  characteristics,  i.e.,  synchronous  arising,  synchronous  perishing  away, having some depended base, same object, resulting in impossibility to analyze and preach as “this nature is contact, this nature is feeling” etc, for disciples who are lacking Knowledge of Omniscience. It was impossible work previously in past periods, it is also impossible work now and it will be impossible work in future really. The Most Venerable ***Nāgasena Mahā Thero***, therefore, explained king ***Milinda*** through taking example of ocean water as follows:- ] 

“My  devotee….  King  ***Milinda***….  The  Exalted  One  had  accomplished  very  very difficult work”. 

“***Bhante….Nāgasena***…which kind of difficult work had been done by the Exalted One?” 

“My devotee… King ***Milinda***… the Exalted One had preached through designating such individual mental ***dhammas*** which arise synchronously by taking single object, as…. 

“this nature of contact with the object is called ***phassa***;”  

“this nature of feeling the taste of object is called ***vedanā***”; 

“this nature of perception the object is called ***saññā***;” 

“this nature of volition the object is called ***cetana***”; 

“this nature of knowing the object is called ***citta***; after analyzing specific nature of each ultimate ***dhamma***. The function which is very difficult to perform, which is preaching through distinguishing in that way, had been well accomplished”. 

“Venerable bhante….let me show example please”. 

“My devotee…King ***Milinda***…after a such man enters into the ocean by boat or ship and then if he laps up the water, can he distinguish as 

“this water is the Ganges water:” 

“this water is the ***Jumna***”; 

“this water is the ***Aciravati*** water:” 

“this water is the ***Sarabhu*** water;” 

“this water is the ***Mahi*** water, respectively?” 

Venerable bhante…..it is very difficult work so as to distinguish individually. 

**PAGE-64** 

“My devotee… King ***Milinda***… the Exalted One had preached through designating such individual mental ***dhammas*** which arise synchronously by taking single object, as…. 

“this nature of contact with the object is called ***phassa***;”  

“…..R……” 

“this nature of knowing the object is called ***citta***; after analyzing specific nature of each ultimate ***dhamma***. The function which is very difficult to perform, which is preaching through distinguishing in that way, had been well accomplished”. 

(***Milinda*** ***pañha-94***)  

Above explanations found in Pāli Text and commentary refer to the fact the preaching of the Exalted One, through analyzing and designating specific mental ***dhammas*** individually which arise synchronously by taking single object, is very difficult function only. However it does not refer the fact disciples are unable to discern mental ***dhammas*** existing within one mind moment. This fact plays vital important role in ways of practice leading to ***nibbāna***. If one considers wrongly, the way of practice will be swerving, Therefore one has to be careful so as not to consider wrongly on some explanations relating to way of practice leading to ***nibbāna***. 

In above explanations of commentary called ***Aţţhasālinī***, the explanation that \_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-1-186)*** 

- “The  Exalted  One  had  preached  through  designating  such  individual  mental 

***dhammas***  which  arise  synchronously  by  taking  single  object  as  “this  is  ***phassa***;  this  is ***veñāņa***; this is ***saññā***; this is ***cetana***; this ***viññāņa***” et., after analyzing specific nature of each ultimate ***dhamma*** and then it is very difficult work”, is noticeable fact for every righteous ***meditator***. 

**PAGE-65** 

\2. Essential Notes relating to consciousness 

According to explanations found in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** (***Vs-2-223***), it has been presented that those  consciousness  which  are  objects  of  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  are  objects  of  ***vipassanā*** knowledge are mundane consciousness and mental concomitants only. In this place it will be presented on kinds of consciousness which are discerned objects by ***vipassanā*** knowledge of worldly  persons  with  three  roots  for  those  virtuous  ones  with  weak  understanding  on ***Abhidhamma***, in brief. 

**2.A. Available kinds of consciousness in the continuum of worldly persons with three** 

**roots, who lack absorption**  

1. unwholesome consciousness….   (12) kinds 
1. rootless consciousness, excluding ***hasituppāda***,…….  (17) kinds 
1. great wholesome consciousness………..   (8) kinds 
1. great consequence consciousness………   (8) kinds.  Total  ……..    (45) kinds 

**2.B. Available kinds of consciousness in the continuum of worldly persons with three** 

**roots, who acquire absorptions** 

1. unwholesome consciousness….   (12) kinds 
1. rootless consciousness, excluding ***hasituppāda***,…….  (17) kinds 
1. great wholesome consciousness………..   (8) kinds 
1. great consequence consciousness………   (8) kinds.  
1. acquired absorptions or all (8) kinds of attainments are available…   (9) kinds Total……………  (54) kinds 

If  the  righteous  ***meditator***  has  got  only  the  fourth  absorption  of  mindfulness  of breathing, those (4) kinds of absorption must be added in (45) kinds mentioned above in the aspect of tetrad method, resulting in (49) kinds in total. In the aspect of pentad method, available kinds of consciousness re (50) kinds in total for that person. If he has got all (8) kinds of attainments, (53) kinds in total, in the aspect of tetrad method, while (54) kinds in total, in the aspect of pentad method. 

Above kinds of consciousness are ***dhammas*** which are deserving to discern in the continuum of oneself internally. He has to discern generally on external continuums as a whole, due to similarity between external situations. Those various kinds of consciousness will, therefore, be presented beforehand.\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-66** 

**2.C. Unwholesome consciousness… (12) kinds** 

1. consciousness rooted in greed…………   (8) kinds 
1. consciousness rooted in anger…………   (2) kinds 
1. consciousness rooted in delusion………   (2) kinds Total…………….  (12) kinds 

**C.1. (8) kinds of consciousness rooted in greed** 

1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling and wrong view, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling and wrong view, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and wrong view, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and wrong view, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling but not wrong view, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling but not wrong view, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling but not wrong view, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling but not wrong view, prompted; 

Those are (8) kinds of consciousness rooted in greed. 

[Notes: Four kinds of consciousness associated with wrong view and four kinds of consciousness  dissociated  with  wrong  view  are  presented  in  order  so  as  to  easy  way  of discerning for practicing ***meditator***. 

**C.2. (2) kinds of consciousness rooted in anger.** 

1) consciousness associated with disagreeable feeling and anger, unprompted; 
1) consciousness associated with disagreeable feeling and anger, prompted; Those two kinds are consciousness rooted in anger which wants to destroy object. 

**PAGE-67** 

**C.3. (2) kinds of consciousness rooted in delusion** 

1) consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and skeptical doubt; 
1) consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and restlessness; 

Those two kinds are consciousness rooted in delusion which brings forth wrong knowing on object.  These  (12)  kinds  of  unwholesome  consciousness  performs  function  of  impulsion within continuity of consciousness of cognitive process. 

**2.1.D. Rootless consciousness ………..(18) kinds** 

Those kinds of consciousness which do not associate with (6) kinds of root-causes, i.e., (3) root-causes of unwholesome ***dhammas***, greed, anger, delusion; (3) root-causes of wholesome  ***dhammas***,  greedlessness,  hatelessness,  non-delusion,  are  called  rootless consciousness (***ahetuku citta***). These are \_\_\_\_ 

1. rootless unwholesome consequence consciousness………..   (7) kinds 
1. rootless wholesome consequence consciousness…………..   (8) kinds 
1. rootless mere functioning consciousness…………………...   (3) kinds Total ……………………….. (18) kinds 

**D.1. (7) kinds of rootless unwholesome consequence consciousness** 

1) seeing-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) hearing-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) smelling-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) tasting-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) touching-consciousness associated with disagreeable feeling; 
1) receiving-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) investigating-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 

These  (7)  kinds  of  consciousness  are  unwholesome  consequence  consciousness, which  performs  functions  of  fivefold-consciousness,  receiving,  investigating,  registering within  cognitive  processes,  during  encountering  with  undesirable  objects.  Because undesirable objects are encountered through previous actions (***kamma***), those consciousness which  arise  during  encountering  with  undesirable-objects  are  also  consequences  of unwholesome deeds. 

**PAGE-68** 

**D.2. (8) kinds of rootless wholesome consequence consciousness** 

1) seeing-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) hearing-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) smelling-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) tasting-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
1) touching-consciousness associated with bodily agreeable feeling; 
1) receiving-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 
7) investigating-consciousness associated with mentally agreeable feeling; 
7) investigating-consciousness associated with neutrality feeling; 

These (8) kinds of consciousness are wholesome consequence consciousness, which performs  functions  of  fivefold-consciousness,  receiving,  investigating,  registering  within cognitive processes, during encountering with desirable objects. Because undesirable objects are encountered through previous actions (***kamma***), those consciousness which arise during encountering with desirable-objects are also consequences of wholesome deeds. 

Functions of fivefold consciousness these five kinds of functions, viz., 

1. ***dassanakicca*** = function of seeing visible-object, done by seeing-consciousness, 
1. ***savanakicca*** = function of hearing audible-object, done by hearing-consciousness 
1. ***ghāyanakicca***  =  function  of  smelling  olfactory-object,  done  by  smelling- consciousness, 
1. ***sāyanakicca*** = function of tasting sapid-object, done by tasting-consciousness, 
1. ***phusanakicca*** = function of touching tactile-object, done by touching-consciousness; are functions of fivefold-consciousness. 

[**Notes:**-\_\_\_\_  Unwholesome  consequence  investigating  consciousness  associated  with neutrality feeling can perform functions of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death of beings of four woeful existences. Wholesome consequence investigating consciousness associated with neutrality feeling can perform functions of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death of congenital blind person etc., and ***asūrā devas*** called ***vinipātika*** who are born depending on ground, in sensual  joyful  existences.  These  are  noticeable  facts  which  are  deserving  to  check  for  a righteous ***meditator*** when he reaches into the stage of dependent-origination, if he had got experience to be born as being of woeful existence or ***vinipātika*** ***asūrā*** in previous lives. Those ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death mind moment with investigating consciousness with neutrality  feeling  consist  of  (11)  mental  ***dhammas***  only.  The  righteous  ***meditator***  has  to scrutinize carefully.] 

**PAGE-69** 

**D.3. Three kinds of rootless mere functioning consciousness (*kiriyā* *citta*)** 

These  kinds  of  consciousness  are  only  mere  functioning  consciousness  which  are neither cause nor result. None of result can be produced by these consciousness. 

These are 

1. ***upekkhāsahagata  pañcadvārāvajjana***  ***citta***  =  five-doors-adverting  consciousness associated with neutrality feelings; 
1. ***upekkhāsahagata  manodvārāvajjana***  ***citta***  =  mind-door-adverting  consciousness associated with neutrality feelings 
1. ***somanassasahagata hasituppāda*** ***citta*** = joyful consciousness of *Arahants* associated with agreeable feeling. 
1) ***pañcadvārāvajjana***  \_\_\_\_\_\_  It  is  adverting  consciousness  which  accommodates various objects appearing on five-doors, eye-door, etc. It associates with neutrality feelings 
1) ***manodvārāvajjana***  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_  It  is  adverting  consciousness  which  accommodates ***dhamma***-objects appearing on the mind-door. It associates with neutrality feeling. In fivefold  doors,  eye-door  etc.,  it  performs  function  of  determining  on  objects  as desirable or undesirable one etc. 
3) ***hasituppāda citta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_ It is a kind of joyful consciousness occurring in continuum of *Arahants*. It associates with agreeable feeling but not ***a-lobha*** (greedlessness), ***a- dosa***  (hatelessness),  ***a-moha***  (non-delusion),  resulting  in  designating  as  ***a-hetuka*** (=rootless). Those *Arahants* usually are joyful with ***somanassa*** ***mahākiriyācitta*** (= great  mere  functioning  consciousness  with  agreeable  feeling).  Those  kinds  of consciousness associate with greedlessness, hatelessness, non-delusion appropriately. The righteous ***meditator*** must understand that this kind of ***hasituppāda*** ***citta*** is  not 

inclusive in the list of objects of ***vipassanā*** discerning, due to occurrence of worldly person status of yourself. Thus (17) kinds of rootless consciousness can arise in the continuum of virtuous ***meditator***, yourself. 

**2.E. Great wholesome consciousness……..(8) kinds** 

1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling and knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling and knowledge, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling but not knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling but not knowledge, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and knowledge, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling but not knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling but not knowledge, prompted; 

**PAGE-70** 

These  kinds  of  consciousness  are  sensuous  great  wholesome  consciousness. Consciousness  of  ***samatha***  practice,  which  are  occurring  up  to  the  field  of  access concentration and consciousness of ***vipassanā*** practice which can keep corporeality-mentality in mind of the righteous ***meditator*** are inclusive in these (8) kinds of consciousness. These kinds are most advantageous consciousness in functions of charity, morality, ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā***  practices.  (In  the  continuum  of  worldly  persons  and  fulfilling  persons) consciousness of ***samatha*** practice, i.e., up to access concentration, and consciousness of ***vipassanā*** practice, i.e., up to trans-linage (***gotrabhu***) which is adjacent to the Noble Path, are only these great wholesome consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process. 

**2.F. Great consequence consciousness ……….(8) kinds** 

1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling and knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling and knowledge, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling but not knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with joyful feeling but not knowledge, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling and knowledge, prompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling but not knowledge, unprompted; 
1. consciousness associated with neutrality feeling but not knowledge, prompted; 

These  kinds  of  consciousness  are  consequence  consciousness  which  arise  through performing either function of registering within cognitive process while superior desirable objects are being encountered in present life or function of ***paţisandhi*** during ***paţisandhi***, or function of life-continuum during life for function of death at the end of existence, which are produced  by  great  wholesome  actions  cultivated  in  previous  existences.  These  mental ***dhammas*** must be discerned and kept in mind thoroughly so as to be understood during discerning registering, ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death consciousness mental ***dhammas***. 

**2.G (i) Fine-material wholesome absorption consciousness….(4) kinds (tetrad method)** 

1. First absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (5) factors of absorption called ***vītakka, vicāra, pīti, sukha, ekaggatā;*** 
1. Second absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (3) factors of absorption called ***pīti***, ***sukha, ekaggatā***; 
1. Third absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (2) factors of absorption called ***sukha, ekaggatā***; 
1. Fourth absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (2) factors of absorption called ***upekkhā, ekaggatā***; 

**PAGE-71** 

Thus  there  are  four  kinds  of  fine-material  wholesome  absorption  consciousness through tetrad method. In this tetrad method the practicing person overcomes both ***vitakka*** and  ***vicāra***  simultaneously.  This  kind  of  person  is  called  sharp  wisdom  person  (***tikkha*** ***paññavā***). If any one is not sharp wisdom person ***vitakka*** and ***vicāra*** can be overcome one after  another  separately,  resulting  in  five  kinds  of  fine-material  wholesome  absorption consciousness.  It  is  classified  as  pentad  method  for  retarded  wisdom  person  (***manda puggala***). 

**G  (ii)  Fine-material  wholesome  absorption  consciousness  …….(5)  kinds  (pentad method)** 

1. First absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (5) factors of absorption called ***vītakka***, ***vicāra***, ***pīti***, ***sukha***, ***ekaggatā***; 
1. Second absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (4) factors of absorption called ***vicāra***, ***pīti***, ***sukha***, ***ekaggatā***; 
1. Second absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (3) factors of absorption called ***pīti***, ***sukha***, ***ekaggatā***; 
1. Third absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (2) factors of absorption called ***sukha***, ***ekaggatā***; 
1. Fourth absorption wholesome consciousness associated with (2) factors of absorption called ***upekkhā***, ***ekaggatā***; 

If the righteous ***meditator*** with vehicle of ***samatha*** attains four kinds of absorptions through tetrad method of five kinds of absorption through pentad method, these absorption mental ***dhammas*** are also inclusive in the list of objects of ***vipassanā*** practice and he has to discern  those  mental  ***dhammas***  through  three  general  characters  called  ***anicca***,  ***dukkha***, ***anatta***. 

Furthermore\_\_\_\_ if the righteous ***meditator*** attains all (8) kinds of attainment called ***samāpatti***, those (4) kinds of Immaterial absorptions ***dhammas*** are also inclusive in the list of objects of ***vipassanā*** practice. 

**2. H. Immaterial wholesome absorption *dhammas*……….(4) kinds** 

1. ***ākāsānañcāyatana***  ***kusala***  ***citta***  =  wholesome  consciousness  with  the  object  of boundless space (concept of space); 
1. ***viññāņañcāyatana***  ***kusala***  ***citta***  =wholesome  consciousness  with  the  object  of boundless consciousness (= consciousness of absorption of boundless space); 
1. ***ākiñcaññāyatana***  ***kusala***  ***citta***  =  wholesome  consciousness  with  the  object  of emptiness concept (= absence of consciousness of absorption of boundless space); 
1. ***nevasaññā*** ***nāsaññāyatana*** ***kusala*** ***citta*** = wholesome consciousness with object of consciousness of absorption of emptiness, which is called neither-perception-nor-non- perception. 

**PAGE-72** 

[It means it is the absorption consciousness which lacks gross perception but very subtle perception called wholesome aggregates of absorption of emptiness only. This kind of preaching  methodology  is  accomplished  through  the  perception  as  priority.  All  mental ***dhammas*** occurring within the absorption of neither-perception-nor-non-perception are very very subtle. Way of discerning on those attainments can be seen in the Section of ***Samatha*** Practice, Volume V. Those lofty consequence consciousness (***mahaggata*** ***vipāka*** ***citta***) and mere  functioning  consciousness  (***kiriyā***  ***citta***)  are  not  included  in  the  list  of  object  of ***vipassanā*** discerning, due to impossibility to arise these ***dhammas*** in continuum of mankind with three roots for recent period.] 

These (54) kinds of consciousness mentioned above, i.e., 

1. unwholesome consciousness…………….  (12) kinds 
1. rootless consciousness……………………   (17) kinds 
1. great wholesome consciousness………….    (8) kinds 
1. great concequence consciousness ………………………   (8) kinds 
1. Fine-material wholesome consciousness …………………..   (5) kinds 
1. Immaterial wholesome consciousness……………………..   (4) kinds 

are objects of ***vipassanā*** practice for worldly person with three roots. Among those consciousness number 1. to 4. are designated as sensuous consciousness, due to frequent occurring in sensual sphere. Nine of consciousness, i.e., ***hasituppāda*** ***citta*** and (8) kinds of great  mere  functioning  consciousness (***mahākiriyā*** ***citta***) are  also sensuous consciousness which are not objects of ***vipassanā*** practice for yourself. Only when one becomes *Arahant* these ***dhammas*** can be discerned as objects of ***vipassanā*** practice. It will be continued to present about mental concomitants because every consciousness has efficiency to arise in the presence of associating mental concomitants within one mind moment as natural fixed law. 

However  it  will  be  presented  instructions  found  in  ***Mahāsatipaţţhāna  Sutta*** beforehand so as to understand how consciousness plays vital important role in ***vipassanā*** practice. 

**2.I. *Cittanupassanā satipaţţhāna* (Contemplating on mind as foundation of mindfulness) *Pāli Quotation (M-1-76)*** 

**PAGE-73** 

=How  does….***bhikkhus***…..the  ***bhikkhu***  discern  the  consciousness  within  mind moment over and over? 

***Bhikkhus***….the practicing ***bhikkhu*** who practices under the admonishment of the Exalted One… 

1. understands the consciousness associated with lust (***rāga***) as consciousness with lust; 
1. understands the consciousness dissociated from lust as consciousness without lust; 
1. understands the consciousness associated with hatred (***dosa***) as consciousness with hatred; 
1. understands  the  consciousness  dissociated  from  hatred  as  consciousness  without hatred; 
1. understands the consciousness associated with delusion (***moha***) as consciousness with delusion; 
1. understands the consciousness dissociated from delusion as  consciousness without delusion; 
1. understands the indolent consciousness (***samkhitta citta***) as indolent consciousness; 
1. understand the distracted consciousness (***vikkhitta citta***) as distracted consciousness; 
1. understands the lofty consciousness (***mahaggata*** ***citta***) as lofty consciousness; 
1. understands the unlofty consciousness (***amahaggata*** ***citta***) as unlofty consciousness; 
1. understands the inferior consciousness (***sa-uttara*** ***citta***) as inferior consciousness; 
1. understands the superior consciousness (***anuttara citta***) as superior consciousness; 
1. understands  the  concentrated  consciousness  (***samahita  citta***)  as  concentrated consciousness; 
1. understands the unconcentrated consciousness (***a-samahita*** ***citta***) as unconcentrated consciousness; 
1. understands the liberated consciousness (***vimutta*** ***citta***) as liberated consciousness; 
1. understands  the  unliberated  consciousness  (***a-vimutta***  ***citta***)  as  unliberated consciousness; 

***(M-1-76)*** 

**PAGE-74** 

**2.J. Explanation of the commentary** 

The Commentator Sayadaw explains above Pāli Terms so as to be understood exactly as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-284)*** 

1. ***sarāgacitta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_Eight kinds of consciousness rooted in greed, which arise together with greed (***lobha***), which are capable of heartfelt desiring on objects are called the consciousness with lust. 
1. ***vītarāga***  ***citta***\_\_\_\_\_\_  Mundane  wholesome  consciousness  and  indeterminate consciousness  (***avyākata  citta***)  are  called  the  consciousness  dissociated  with  lust. According to the term, ***vītarāga*** ***citta***, the Exalted One preached with the intention to refer only those consciousness which are deserving to discern as object of ***vipassanā*** practice  through  generalizing  as  three  characters  but  not  all  ***dhammas***  which  are called  ***vītarāgacitta***  collectively.  Because  of  this  reason,  any  Supra-mundane consciousness  can  not  be  referred  among  (16)  kinds  of  consciousness  mentioned above. 

Mundane  wholesome  consciousness  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_If  the  righteous  ***meditator***  who  is  only worldly person with three roots has got (8) kinds of attainment, the numbers of mundane wholesome consciousness which are available in his continuum are \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. great wholesome consciousness……………..   (8) kinds 
1. fine-material wholesome consciousness……..   (5) kinds 
1. Immaterial wholesome consciousness……….   (4) kinds Total…………………   (17) kinds 

If the righteous ***meditator*** has got fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing, (4) kinds of fine-material absorption through tetrad method; (5) kinds of fine-material absorption through  pentad  method,  are  available.  Therefore  it  is  possible  to  arise  great  wholesome consciousness and fine-material wholesome consciousness only in his continuum. 

**PAGE-75** 

***Avyākata***\_\_\_\_\_\_ Mundane consequence and mere functioning consciousness which are neither wholesome nor unwholesome are called ***avyākata*** (=indeterminate). Numbers of indeterminate consciousness which are available in the continuum of worldly person with three roots are\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. rootless  mere  functioning  consciousness,  called  five-doors-adverting,  mind-door- adverting………………………  (2) kinds 
1. rootless unwholesome consequence consciousness………  (7) kinds 
1. rootless wholesome consequence consciousness………….  (8) kinds 
1. great consequence consciousness………………………….  (8) kinds Total………………………. (25) kinds 

In five-doors-cognitive processes \_\_\_\_\_\_five-doors-adverting, seeing-consciousness (hearing-consciousness,  smelling-consciousness,  tasting-consciousness,  toughing- consciousness), receiving, investigating, registering-consciousness are available. 

In  mind-door-cognitive  process  \_\_\_\_  mind-door-adverting  and  registering- consciousness are available. 

Remaining (27) kinds of consciousness\_\_ 

1. fine-material consequence consciousness……………….   (5) kinds 
1. Immaterial consequence consciousness………………..   (4) kinds 
1. ***hasituppāda***, rootless mere functioning consciousness….   (1) kinds 
1. great mere functioning consciousness……………………   (8) kinds 
1. fine-material mere functioning consciousness……………   (5) kinds 
1. Immaterial mere functioning consciousness………………   (4) kinds Total……………………….  (27) kinds  

are impossible to arise in the continuum of worldly person with three roots. 

Furthermore,  (2)  kinds  of  consciousness  rooted  in  anger  and  (2)  kidns  of consciousness  rooted  in  delusion  are  excluded  in  two  terms,  ***sarāgacitta***,  ***vītarāga***  ***citta***. However those four kinds of consciousness are included in the list of objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge because the Exalted One continued to preach as ***sa***-***dosa*** ***citta***, ***samoha*** ***citta*** etc. 

3. ***sadosa*** ***citta*** \_\_\_\_ These are (2) kinds of consciousness which associate with hatred. 
3. ***vītadosa*** ***citta*** \_\_\_\_\_ Mundane wholesome consciousness and mundane indeterminate consciousness are called consciousness without hatred (***vītadosa*** ***citta***). [It should be recognized on mundane wholesome and indeterminate consciousness in similar way mentioned above.] These (10) kinds of unwholesome consciousness, i.e., (8) kinds of consciousness rooted in greed and (2) kinds of consciousness rooted in delusion are excluded in these two kinds, ***sadosa*** ***citta*** and ***vītadosa*** ***citta***. 
5. ***samoha***  ***citta***  \_\_\_\_\_\_  Two  kinds  of  consciousness  rooted  in  delusion  are  called consciousness associated with delusion. In the next method \_\_\_ Because the delusion associates with all kinds of unwholesome consciousness, (12) kinds of unwholesome consciousness are called consciousness with delusion. 

**PAGE-76** 

6. ***vītamoha***  ***citta***  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_  Mundane  wholesome  consciousness  and  mundane indeterminate consciousness are called consciousness without delusion. (It should be recognized as mentioned above. 
6. ***samkhitta  citta***  \_\_\_\_\_  Those  consciousness  which  always  falls  back  from  object, which always follows along with two ***dhammas***, i.e., sloth (***thina***) of consciousness and  torpor  (***middha***)  of  mental  concomitants  are  called  indolent  consciousness (***samkhitta*** ***citta***). These (5) kinds, viz.,  
1. consciousness rooted in greed, prompted……  (4) kinds, 
1. consciousness rooted in hatred, prompted……..  (1) kinds 

Total………………  (5) kinds 

Are called indolent consciousness. 

8. ***vikkhitta citta***\_\_\_\_\_\_ Consciousness rooted in delusion which always arises together with restlessness (***uddhacca***) is called distracted consciousness (***vikkhitta citta***), due to wandering from here to there of various objects as a stone falls on ash. 
8. ***mahaggata*** ***citta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_ Fine-material consciousness and Immaterial consciousness are called lofty consciousness (***mahaggata*** ***citta***), due to 
1) presence of efficiency to remove defilement for a long time (***vikkhambhana pahāna***); 
1) occurrence of having great advantages; 
1) presence of efficiency to arise continuously through continuity of mentality of those absorption ***dhammas***, one hour, two hours, one day, two days etc., in the continuum of virtuous persons with those lofty absorptions,  
1) occurrence of reaching into lofty and Exalted Superior condition; 
1) in other words\_\_\_ due to occurrence of noble practice which is worth reaching through only exalted efficiency, i.e., great exalted and plentiful wholesome wish etc. (***M-ţī-1-372***) 

Only (9) kinds of lofty consciousness (if he has got (8) attainments) are available in the continuum of worldly person with three roots. 

10. ***a-mahaggata*** ***citta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_ It means only sensuous consciousness (***kāmāvacāra citta***), due to referring to consciousness which are objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge. Only these (45) kinds of consciousness of sensuous sphere, viz.,  
1. unwholesome consciousness…………………  (12) kinds 
1. rootless consciousness………………………..  (17) kinds 
1. great wholesome consciousness………………   (8) kinds 
1. great consequence consciousness……………..   (8) kinds Total…………………..   (45) kinds 

Are available. 

**PAGE-77** 

11. ***sa-uttara citta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_ Among mundane consciousness which are objects ***vipassanā*** knowledge, lofty consciousness are  more superior than consciousness of sensuous sphere. Consciousness of sensuous sphere are, therefore, called inferior consciousness (***sa-uttara citta***.) 
11. ***anuttara citta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_ Among mundane consciousness which are objects ***vipassanā*** knowledge,  lofty  consciousness  are  the  most  superior  ones.  There  is  no  mundane consciousness  which  is  more  superior  than  those  lofty  consciousness,  resulting  in designating as ***anuttara citta***. Among those lofty consciousness, because Immaterial consciousness  are  more  superior  than  fine-material  consciousness,  the  former  are designated as ***anuttara*** ***citta*** (= superior consciousness) while the latter, ***sa-uttara citta*** (inferior consciousness). 
11. ***samahita citta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_ Concentrated consciousness with any kind of concentration, full-concentration or access concentration are called ***samahita*** ***citta***. 
11. ***a-samahita*** ***citta*** \_\_\_\_\_\_ Consciousness of sensuous sphere which are lacking two kinds of concentration called full-concentration, access concentration, are called  ***a- samahita*** ***citta***. 
11. ***vimutta*** ***citta*** \_\_\_\_\_ Sensuous wholesome consciousness are called ***vimutta*** ***citta***, due to  temporary  liberation  from  defilements.  Nine  kinds  of  lofty  wholesome consciousness are also called ***vimutta*** ***citta***, due to liberation from defilements for a long time. ***(M-ţī-1-372)*** 
11. ***a-vimutta*** ***citta*** \_\_\_\_\_ The consciousness which are not liberated defilements either temporarily or for a long time are called ***a-vimutta*** ***citta***. These consciousness, namely  
1. five-doors-adverting, mind-door-adverting 
1. fivefold consciousness, 
1. receiving, 
1. investigating, 
1. determining consciousness, 
1. unwholesome impulsions 
1. registering consciousness are designated as ***avimutta*** ***citta***. ***(M-ţī-1-372)*** 

**PAGE-78** 

Because the Exalted One preached this section with referring to only consciousness which are objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge \_\_\_\_\_ it should be recognized the fact  

These three kinds of ***vimutti*** (= deliverance). i.e., 

1. ***samucchedavimutti*** = the Noble Path consciousness which are absolute deliverance from defilements after absolute eradication of defilements, 
1. ***paţippassaddhi vimutti*** = the Noble Fruit consciousness which are deliverance from defilements through extinguishment of fire of defilements which are eradicated by the Noble Path ***dhammas***, 
1. ***nissaraņavimutti*** = ***nibbāna*** which is deliverance from craving (= defilements), 

are not concern with this section. ***(M-ţī-1-372)*** 

In this preaching the Exalted One instructed to discern unwholesome consciousness called  ***sarāga***  ***citta***,  ***sadosa***  ***citta***,  ***samoha***  ***citta***  also.  The  righteous  ***meditator***  who  has heartfelt desire to attain ***nibbāna*** should not forget this fact. 

With  regarding  to  these  instructions  this  work  presents  ways  of  keeping  mental ***dhamma*** in mind through breaking down each compactness of mentality called ***nāmaghana*** which  are  occurring  in  each  mind  moment  within  various  kinds  of  cognitive  processes called\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. five-doors-cognitive processes, mind-door-cognitive process consisting of wholesome impulsions, 
1. five-doors-cognitive  processes,  mind-door-cognitive  process  consisting  of unwholesome impulsions so as to reach ultimate nature. 

In this case some righteous ***meditators*** complain the fact relating to way of discerning on mental ***dhammas*** occurring in unwholesome impulsions of cognitive processes in a way that  whether  or  not  unwholesome  deeds  arise  again  through  discerning  unwholesome ***dhammas***. 

When they have got explanation that the Exalted One, himself, instructed to discern unwholesome consciousness in ***Mahāsatipaţţhāna Sutta*** they give lame excuse again in a way  that  the  Exalted  One  instructed  to  discern  unwholesome  consciousness  which  arise automatically  but  not  those  consciousness  which  are  intentionally  discerned  through scrutinizing them, in ***Mahāsatipaţţhāna Sutta***. 

**PAGE-79** 

It will be  explicit for virtuous ***meditators*** who have heartfelt desire to  attain true 

***dhammas***. 

In the aspect of ultimate reality there is no ***dhamma*** which arise automatically or spontaneously in the Buddha’s ***Abhidhamma***. Please see the following preaching. 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-3-83, Ayoniso manasikāra Sutta)*** 

- ***Bhikkhus***…… for a person with unwise attention called ***ayonisomanasikāra*** 
1. not only heartfelt desires to sensual pleasures (***kāmacchanda***) which do not arise yet usually arise but those heartfelt desires to sensual pleasures which have arisen also proliferate exceedingly. 
1. not only ill-will called (***vyāpāda***) which do not arise yet usually arise but those ill-will which have arisen also proliferate exceedingly. 
1. not only sloth and torpor of consciousness and mental concomitants which do not arise  yet  usually  arise  but  those  sloth  and  torpor  of  consciousness  and  mental concomitants which have arisen also proliferate exceedingly. 
1. not  only  restlessness  and  remorse  which  do  not  arise  yet  usually  arise  but  those restlessness and remorse which have arisen also proliferate exceedingly. 
1. not only skeptical doubt called (***vicikicchā***) which do not arise yet usually arise but those  skeptical  doubt  called  (***vicikicchā***)  which  have  arisen  also  proliferate exceedingly. (***Sam-3-83***) 

In accordance with this preaching the unwise-attention is a proximate cause of all kinds of unwholesome ***dhammas***. Other causal ***dhammas*** such as \_\_\_\_ 

1. presence of depended base, 
1. presence of object to be depended,  
1. benefiting by associating ***dhammas***, contact etc., 

which concern with all mental ***dhammas*** are also present. [It will be obvious in section of Dependent-Origination. Please see on page 288,289, 295, 305 of this volume.] 

Thus there is no spontaneous or automatic arising ultimate ***dhamma*** in the aspect of ultimate reality. 

**PAGE-80 2.1. K. The reason why unwholesome *dhammas* are kept in mind** 

Those  foolish  worldly  persons  without  eye  of  wisdom  in  the  aspect  of  ultimate ***dhammas*** always obsess on both wholesome and unwholesome ***dhammas*** through craving, conceit, wrong view along with infinite rounds of rebirth called ***samsāra***. 

They have got wrong obsession on wholesome ***dhammas***, unwholesome ***dhammas*** in such ways that \_\_\_\_ 

“my mind is different from others,” 

“my volition is different from others,” 

“my faith is different from others,” 

“my knowledge is different from others,” 

“my greed is different from others,” 

“my conceit is different from others,” 

“my anger is different from others,” 

resulting  in  taking  pride  in  their  accomplishments  of  either  wholesome  or  unwholesome deeds wrongly. They satisfy with their accomplishments. 

They usually praise about sons, daughters, grand sons and grand daughters so as not to  finish  to  listen.  Succeeding  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  always  arise  by  taking  objects preceding unwholesome ***dhammas*** in their continuums. They usually take pride basing on wholesome deeds. They want to vie each other relating to charity, acquired or experienced ***dhammas***,  having  qualities  of  sons,  having  qualities  of  daughters  etc.  Thus  succeeding unwholesome  deeds  always  arise  frequently  depending  on  wholesome  and  unwholesome ***dhammas*** which have arisen previously through unwise attention. 

Those  wholesome  and  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  must  be  discerned  as  objects ***vipassanā*** knowledge in order to eradicate obsessions called craving, conceit, wrong view on those wholesome and unwholesome ***dhammas*** completely. 

The  function  of  keeping  those  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  in  mind  called ***arūpapariggaha*** must be performed beforehand so as to generalize as ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta*** through ***vipassanā*** knowledge thoroughly. 

Now  it  will  be  continued  to  present  about  mental  concomitants  because  every consciousness never arise in the absence of mental concomitants. 

**PAGE-81 3. Essential notes relating to mental concomitants (*cetasika*) 3.A. Four general characteristics of mental concomitants** 

1. ***ekuppāda*** = synchronous arising with consciousness, 
1. ***ekanirodha*** = synchronous cessation with consciousness 
1. ***ekālambaņa*** = presence of the same object with consciousness 
1. ***ekavatthuka*** = presence of the same base with consciousness. 

Thus  mental  concomitants  have  got  four  associating  characteristics  with consciousness  called  ***cetoyuttalakkhaņā***.  Every  mental  concomitant  has  got  these  four characteristics as natural fixed law in five-groups-existences called sensuous sphere and fine- material  sphere.  In  four-groups  existence  called  Immaterial  sphere,  however,  one characteristic, i.e., ***ekavatthuka*** (=presence of the same base), is deficit, due to absence of depended base in those spheres. There are (52) kinds of mental concomitants. 

**3.B. (52) kinds of mental concomitants** 

1. ***sabbacittasādhāraņa*** ***cetasika*** =mental concomitants which have relationship with all kinds of consciousness…..(7) kinds; 
1. ***pakiņņaka cetasika*** = miscellaneous mental concomitants which have  relationship with some kinds of consciousness but not some kinds ……..(6) kinds 
1. ***a-kusala***  ***cetasika***  =  unwholesome  mental  concomitants  which  associate  with unwholesome consciousness appropriately (14) kinds; 
1. ***sobhaņa*** ***cetasika*** = comely mental concomitants which associate with comely kinds of consciousness appropriately……. (25) kinds; 

Thus there are (52) kinds in total. 

**C. *sabbacitta sādhāraņa* *cetasika* (7) kinds** 

1. ***phassa*** (contact)   = the nature of touching with the object (characteristic); 
   1. the nature of connecting between object and consciousness (function); 
1. ***vedanā*** (feeling) = the nature of being felt the taste of object; 
1. ***saññā*** (perception) = the nature of perceiving the object; 
1. ***cetanā*** (volition) = the nature of willingness to urge associating ***dhammas*** in order to reach on the object; 
1. ***ekaggatā*** (one-pointedness) = the nature of stability of mind on single object;  
- the  nature  of  capable  of  non-spreading  on  the associating ***dhammas*** so as not to occur in disorder; 

**PAGE-82** 

[Consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  which  arise  synchronously  within  one  mind moment are called associating ***dhammas***.] 

6. ***jīvita*** (vitality) = the nature of protecting on associating ***dhammas*** for just mere living one mind moment; 
6. ***manasikāra*** (attention) = the nature of attending the mind towards object; = the nature of taking into heart the object attentively. 
4. **Miscellaneous mental concomitants……..(6) kinds** 
1. ***vitakka*** (initial application) = the nature of applying (or putting) consciousness and mental concomitants on the object; 
1. ***vicāra*** (sustained application) = the nature of continuous sustaining consciousness and mental concomitants on the object; 

=the nature of taking object over and over again; 

3. ***adhimokkha*** (definite decision)= the nature of deciding the object; 
3. ***vīriya*** (effort) = the nature of endeavouring; 

( It is the nature of endeavouring to arise associating ***dhammas*** on single object. It is an effort in order to arise greed, hatred, delusion in the aspect of unwholesome deeds; in order to arise greedlessness, hatelessness, non-delusion in the aspect of wholesome deeds.) 

5. ***pīti*** (pleasurable interest) = the nature of pleasurable interest on object; 
5. ***chanda*** (wish) = the nature of wishing to take object; 

the nature of wishing to make object; 

[**Notes:**  \_\_\_\_  It  is  the  nature  of  wishing  to  arise  greed,  hatred,  delusion,  greedlessness, hatelessness, non-delusion etc., on the object.] 

Above (13) kinds of  mental concomitants, i.e. (7) kinds of ***sabbacitta*** ***sādhāraņa*** and (6) kinds of ***pakiņņaka***, are called ***aññasamāna*** ***cetasika*** (= both sides mental concomitants): While these are associating with unwholesome mental ***dhammas*** they have got designation as unwholesome ***dhammas***; while these are associating with wholesome mental ***dhammas***, they have got designation as wholesome ***dhammas***; while these are associating with consequence and mere functioning ***dhamma***, they have got designation as indeterminate. In other words \_\_\_\_ they have got designation as uncomely (***asobhaņa***) during associating with uncomely consciousness;  they  have  got  designation  as  comely  (***sobhaņa***)  during  associating  with comely consciousness. Those are mental concomitants with both sides. 

**PAGE-83** 

Significance of ***cetanā***, ***manasikāra***, ***vitakka*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

[Consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  which  arise  synchronously  within  one  mind moment are called associating ***dhammas***.] 

Initial application (***vitakka***) is capable of applying (or putting) associating ***dhammas*** on the object; the volition (***cetanā***) is capable of urging associating ***dhammas*** on the object; the attention (***manasikāra***) is capable of attending associating ***dhammas*** towards object. 

Venerable ***Mahāgandhārammaņa*** ***Sayādaw*** explained in ***Sangahabhāsāţţīkā*** the fact relating to this fact as follows:\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to presence of similarity among nature of ***vitakka***, ***cetanā***, ***manasikāra***, how it can be recognized on significance characters of these three mental concomitants? This is question. 

The answer is that \_\_\_\_ during rowing, three persons, i.e., anterior rower, middle rower, posterior rower, row synchronously on a rowing boat; the middle one plays important role in performing so as to reach the goal quickly; while helmsman, the posterior one plays important role in rowing straight forward to goal; the anterior one plays important role in winning a race. Similarly \_\_\_***vitakka*** has responsibility to perform so as to reach the goal quickly  as  middle  rower;  ***manasikāra***  has  responsibility  to  steer  associating  ***dhammas*** towards object as helmsman; ***cetanā*** has responsibility to urge associating ***dhammas*** with object as anterior rower who wins a race respectively. [It should be understood the facts, object is similar to winning post; associating ***dhammas*** are similar to boat and so forth.] (***Sangahabhāsāţīkā-98***) 

5. **Unwholesome mental concomitants (14) kinds** 
1. mental  concomitants  which  associate  with  all  unwholesome  consciousness…..  (4) kinds 
1. mental  concomitants  which  associate  with  only  consciousness  rooted  in  greed appropriately….. (3) kinds 
1. mental  concomitants  which  associate  with  only  consciousness  rooted  in  hatred appropriately……..(4) kinds 
1. mental  concomitants  which  associate  with  only  prompted  unwholesome consciousness (***sasańkhārika***)………..(2) kinds 
1. mental  concomitants  which  associate  with  only  consciousness  rooted  in  delusion appropriately………..(1) kinds 

in Total……………………(14) kinds 

**PAGE-84** 

**E.1  Mental concomitants which associate with all unwholesome consciousness…..(4)** 

**kinds** 

1) ***moha*** (delusion) = the nature of nescience on real phenomenon of object;  
   1. the nature of wrong knowing on object; 
1) ***ahirika***  (consciencelessness)  =  the  nature  of  consciencelessness  to  perform  (a) misdeeds (b) unwholesome ***dhammas***, selfish desire, anger, delusion etc., 
1) ***anottappa*** (shamelessness) = the nature of shamelessness to perform (a) misdeeds (b) unwholesome ***dhammas***, selfish desire, anger, delusion etc., 
1) ***uddhacca*** (restlessness) = the nature of wandering from object 

**E.2 Greed-group mental concomitants (3) kinds** 

5) ***lobha*** (greed) = the nature of obsession on object as “I, mine”; 
   1. the nature of heartfelt desire on object; 
   1. the nature of ***atta***chment on object; 
5) ***diţţhi***  (wrong  view)  =  the  nature  of  wrong  obsession  on  object  as  permanence, happiness, self, pleasingness 
5) ***māna*** (conceit) = the nature of pride as “I, I”; 
- the nature of arrogance 

Explanation\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-157)*** 

Delusion is also known as ***avijjā*** (ignorance). If all kinds of living and non-living in 

(31) realms are analyzed by eye of wisdom in the aspect of ultimate nature, one will know as 

1. piles of corporeal ***dhammas***, 
1. piles of mental ***dhammas***, 
1. piles of corporeal and mental ***dhammas***; these kinds of realization are proper ways and it is the Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality and Corporeality. 
1. If one will know as piles of causal ***dhammas*** and piles of resultant ***dhammas***, those kinds of realization are also proper ways and it is the Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition. 

**PAGE-85** 

Those corporeality-mentality-causes and results are ***sańkhāradhamma*** (= conditioned things), due to arising through respective conditional relations. Those conditioned things are impermanent  ***dhammas***  which  always  perish  away  just  after  arising;  those  are  suffering ***dhammas***  which  are  always  being  oppressed  by  incessant  phenomena  of  arising  and perishing away; those are non-self ***dhammas*** which are not existing as undestructible essence of self (***atta***); those are loathsome ***dhammas***. 

If one understands on those conditioned thing as 

5. ***anicca*** ***dhamma*** (= impermanent) 
5. ***dukkha*** ***dhamma*** (= suffering) 
5. ***anatta*** ***dhamma*** (= non-self) 
5. ***asubha*** ***dhamma*** (= loathsome), 

Those  kind  of  realization  are  also  proper  ways  and  those  are  real  ***vipassanā***   knowledges. 

Therefore if one knows and sees living and non-living things occurring in (31) realms 

as either 

1. piles of corporeal ***dhammas***; piles of mental ***dhammas***; piles of fivefold-aggregates; piles of twelvefold bases; piles of eighteenfold elements, or 
1. piles of causal ***dhammas***; piles of resultant ***dhammas***; or 
1. piles of ***anicca*** ***dhammas***; piles of ***dukkhadhammas***; piles of ***anatta*** ***dhammas***; piles of ***asubha*** ***dhammas***; 

Those kinds of knowledge is called ***sammādiţţhi*** (= right view) or ***vijjā*** (=knowledge). 

Unless one knows and sees in that proper way but he knows and sees living things as man, woman, person, being, human, *deva*, *brahma* etc; or non-living things as gold, silver, tree,  water,  ground,  forest,  mountain  etc;  or  all  living  and  non-living  things  as  ***nicca*** (=permanent) ***dhammas***, ***sukha*** (=happiness) ***dhammas***, ***atta*** (= self) ***dhamma***, ***subha*** ( = pleasingness) ***dhamma***, reversely, it is called wrong knowing ( = ***avijjā***). 

In this place two kinds of obsession as self (***atta***) will be presented so as to understand profoundly on ignorance (***avijjā***) and wrong view ( ***micchādiţţhi***). 

Two kinds of obsession as ***atta*** (self) 

There are two kinds of obsessions as self, i.e., through worldly usage and weighing pros and cons by heretics with wrong view. 

1.obsession as self through worldly usage \_\_\_\_  

It is obsession either on living things as man, woman, person, being, human, *deva*, *brahma*, buffalo, cow, animal etc., or on non-living things as gold, silver, farm, house, tree, water, earth, forest, mountain etc. It is a firm faith on the fact those things are really present as worldly usage. That kind of obsession is also known as conventional perception (***vohāra***) which arise through conventional reality. ***(M-ţī-1-365, 366)*** 

As  mentioned  above  when  one  can  keep  conditioned  things  in  mind  through penetrative knowledge and if he can realize as piles of conditioned things, piles of ***anicca***, piles of ***dukkha***, piles of ***anatta***, that kind of realization is right. If one knows, sees and obsesses as man, woman, person, being, human, ***deva***, ***brahma***, buffalo, cow, animal, that kind of knowing, seeing and obsession is wrong. 

**PAGE-86** 

Furthermore when one can discern external non-living things so as to see four great elements, he will see only corporeal units. If he analyze those corporeal units through eye of wisdom, those units consists of corporealities produced by temperature, which have got the nutriment as eighth factor and if it consists of sound, sound nonads can be found. The term, ***utu*** (= temperature), means the fire-element within each corporeal unit. Those non-living things called gold, silver etc., are actually, groups of corporeal units and the fire-element within each unit can produce new corporeal unit again and again. Those are piles of ultimate nature of ***dhammas*** which always arise and perish away continuously even if causes are not finished.  Therefore  if  one  can  realize  those  non-living  thing  as  either  piles  of  corporeal ***dhammas*** with the nutriment as eighth factor or piles of sound nonads, it is right knowledge; if  he  can  realize  as  piles  of  ***anicca***,  piles  of  ***dukkha***,  piles  of  ***anatta***,  it  is  also  right knowledge. If he knows and sees as gold, silver, it is wrong knowing; if he obsesses as gold, silver, that obsession or belief is wrong, resulting in designating as obsession as self through worldly usage. 

**2. Obsession as self through wrong view**  

In this kind of obsession as self there are two kinds of obsession in brief 

i.e. (a) ***paramaatta*** (b) ***jīvaatta***. 

1) ***paramaatta*** = It is obsession as ***paramaatta*** ( = creator self) by which one believes that various beings together with the world are created by creator self (***paramaatta***). 
1) ***jīvaatta*** = It is obsession as ***jīvaatta*** ( = creation self) by which one believes that there are vital body, consciousness body, butterfly body, self body which are created by any kind of creator. Among five aggregates, any aggregate, one or two or three etc., are obsessed as self. It is also known as personality wrong view (***sakkāya diţţhi***). All kinds of wrong views arise basing on this personality wrong view. 

“***santokāyo sakkāyo*** + apparent arising five aggregates are personal (***sakkāya***). The wrong obsession on five aggregates as self (***atta***) is personality wrong view. 

**PAGE-87** 

The perception (***saññā***) which arises through following that personality wrong view is called ***sattasaññā*** (=perception as being). Thus there are two kinds of ***sattasaññā*** (perception as being), i.e. (a) ***sattasaññā*** which arises through following self-opinion (***attadiţţhi***) and (b)***sattasaññā*** which arises through worldly usage. (***M-ţī-1-365, 366***) 

The  former  one  is  called  the  obsession  as  self  with  wrong  view  while  the  latter (***sattasaññā*** which arises through worldly usage) is called ***lokasamaññā*** obsession as self. It should be recognized on two kinds of obsession as self in brief. Only when one understands those two kinds of obsession as self, can he understand delusion (***moha***) and wrong view (***diţţhi***) thoroughly. 

***Moha* (delusion) and *diţţhi* (wrong view)** 

Delusion is the wrong knowing on all living and non-living things within (31) realms as ***nicca***, ***sukha***, ***atta***, ***subha***, while wrong view is wrong belief on all living and non-living things within (31) realms as ***nicca***, ***sukha***, ***atta***, ***subha***. 

**E.3 Hatred group mental concomitants (4) kinds** 

8) ***dosa*** (hatred) = the nature of harsh mind, 
   1. the nature of desire to destroy the object; 
8) ***issā*** (envy) = the nature of envious mind on other wealth; 
   1. the nature of jealousy on the better fortune of others; 
8) ***macchariya*** (stinginess)  = the nature of un-generosity of one’s wealth; 
   1. the nature of giving unwillingly or niggardly; 
8) ***kukkucca*** (remorse) = (a) the nature of deep, bitter regret for experienced past wrong doings or misdeeds; 

(b) the  nature  of  deep,  bitter  regret  for  un-experienced  good doings or wholesome deeds; 

**E.4. Prompted group mental concomitants (2) kinds** 

12) ***thina*** (sloth) = the nature of idleness of consciousness; 
    1. the nature of un-enthusiasm of consciousness; 
12) ***middha*** ( torpor) = the nature of idleness of mental concomitants; 
- the nature of un-enthusiasm of mental concomitants; 

**PAGE-88** 

**E.5. Delusion group mental concomitant (1) kind** 

14) ***vicikicchā*** (sceptical doubt )= It is the nature of skeptical doubt on these (8) kinds of situations, viz., 
1) real Omniscient Perfectly Enlightened One; 
1) real ***Dhamma*** called Path, Fruit, ***nibbāna***, and doctrinal teachings; 
1) real ***sanghā***, real Noble Ones; 
1) three trainings, training of morality, training of concentration, training of wisdom; 
1) past lives = past aggregates called anterior proximity of rounds of rebirth; 
1) future lives = future aggregates called posterior proximity of rounds of rebirth; 
1) past  and  future  lives  =  past  and  future  aggregates  called  anterior  and  posterior extremities of rounds of rebirth; 
1) principle of dependent-origination. 

[Notes:\_\_\_\_ Sceptical doubt on ***kamma*** (action) and consequence of ***kamma*** (action) are inclusive in this skeptical doubt on principle of dependent-origination. (***Abhi-1-208***)] 

6. **Comely mental concomitants (25) kinds** 

These (25) kinds are namely, 

1) ***sobhaņasādhāraņa*** ***cetasika*** = mental concomitants which associate with all comely consciousness   ….. (19) kinds; 
1) ***viratī*** ***cetasika*** = abstinence mental concomitants   ….. (  3) kinds; 
1) ***appamaññā*** ***cetasika*** = boundless mental concomitants   (  2) kinds; 
1) ***paññindriya*** ***cetasika*** = knowledge     ….. (  1) kind 

In total…………………   ….. (25) kinds 

1) ***sobhaņasādhāraņa*** ***cetasika*** (19) kinds 
1) ***saddhā*** (faith) = the nature of firm faith on (8) situations (as mentioned in ***vicikicchā***) 
- the nature of subscribing on (8) situations; 

[Notes:\_\_\_\_\_ It is essential to distinguish its meaning depending on situations, i.e., firm faith on nobility of the Exalted One during practicing recollection of the Buddha, and so forth:] 

2) ***sati*** (mindfulness) = It is the nature of capable of submerging of associating ***dhammas*** on wholesome object, Buddha, ***dhamma*** etc., as a slab under water but not floating gourd; 
   1. the nature of steadfastness of mind on object; 
   1. the nature of not forgetting the object; 
2) ***hiri***  (  conscientious  scruples)  =  the  nature  of  conscientious  scruples  about  bodily misconduct; 
2) ***ottappa*** (shame) = the nature of dread about bodily misconduct; 
2) ***a-lobha*** (non-greed) = the nature of non-***atta***chment on mundane objects; 
- the nature of non-obsessing as “mine” 

[Notes:\_\_\_\_\_\_ Mundane objects means any kind of discerned object called living and non- living sensual objects occurring in (31) realms, such as, visible-object.] 

6) ***a-dosa*** (non-hate) = the nature of non-harsh mind on object; 
- the nature of non-desire to destroy the object; 
7) ***tatramajjhattatā*** (equanimity) = the nature of equanimity of mind on object (so as not to  reach  both  extremities  called  conceit  and  sloth-torpor  but  to  attain  balanced consciousness and mental concomitants in respective functions. 
7) ***kāyapassaddhi*** = the nature of tranquility of mental concomitants; 
7) ***citta*** ***passaddhi*** = the nature of tranquility of consciousness; 
7) ***kāya lahutā*** = the nature of agility of mental concomitants; 
7) ***citta*** ***lahutā*** = the nature of agility of consciousness; 

**PAGE-90** 

12) ***kāya mudutā*** = the nature of elasticity of mental concomitants; 
12) ***citta mudutā*** = the nature of elasticity of consciousness; 
12) ***kāya kammaññatā*** = the nature of adaptability of mental concomitants; 
12) ***citta*** ***kammaññatā*** = the nature of adaptability of consciousness; 
12) ***kāya  pāguññatā***  =  the  nature  of  proficiency  of  mental  concomitants  in  various wholesome deeds, charity, morality, practice etc.; 
    1. the nature of mastery of mental concomitants 
    1. the nature of void of faulty defilement; 
12) ***citta*** ***paguññātā*** = the nature of proficiency of consciousness in various wholesome deeds, charity, morality, practice etc.; 
    1. the nature of mastery of consciousness 
    1. the nature of void of faulty defilement; 
12) ***kāyujukatā*** = the nature of rectitude of mental concomitants; 
    1. the nature of lack of swerving called pretence and deceit; 
12) ***cittujukatā***  = the nature of rectitude of consciousness 
- the nature of lack of swerving called pretence and deceit; 

[ **Notes:** \_\_\_\_\_ Nature  of concealing fault is called ***māyā*** (pretence)  while the nature of showing un-acquired nobility is ***sāţheyya*** (deceit).] 

2) Abstinence mental concomitants (3) kinds 
1) ***sammāvācā*** (right speech)= nature of abstinence from bodily verbal misconducts (4)  kinds which do not concern with livelihood; 
   1. nature of avoiding verbal unwholesome deeds; 
1) ***sammākammanta*** (right action) = nature of abstinence from bodily misconducts (3) kinds which do not concern with livelihood; 
   1. nature of avoiding body unwholesome deeds; 
1) ***sammāājīva*** (right livelihood) = nature of abstinence from verbal misconducts (4) kinds and bodily misconducts (3) kinds, which concern with livelihood; 
- nature of verbal and bodily unwholesome deeds; 

**PAGE-91** 

3) Boundless mental concomitants (2) kinds 
1) ***karuņā*** (compassion) = the nature of compassion, pity by taking object of suffering being; 
   1. the nature of desire to save from various kinds of suffering; 
1) ***muditā*** (appreciative joy)  = the nature of rejoicing by taking object of joyful being; 
- the nature of non-envious mind or non-jealous mind; 
4) ***paññindriya*** (controlling faculty of wisdom) mental concomitant (1) kind 

(1) ***paññindriya***   =  the  nature  of  penetrative  knowing  and  seeing  on  real  phenomena  of ultimate ***dhammas***; 

- the nature of penetrative knowing and seeing on Four Noble Truths; 

[Notes:\_\_\_\_ The wisdom which is also known as knowledge (***ñāņa***), non-delusion (***moha***), right  view  (***sammādiţţhi***)  is  called  controlling  faculty  of  wisdom,  due  to  occurrence  of controlling faculty in the function of knowing on Four Noble Truths.] 

Now it has been presented on only specific characteristics of (52) kinds of mental concomitants as priority and it will be insufficient to be understood easily for practicing persons  with  weak  knowledge  in  ***Abhidhamma***.  Therefore  some  important  facts  will  be presented  again  in  section  of  ***lakkhaņa-rasa--paccupaţţhāna-padaţţhāna***  (=characteristic- function-manifestation-proximate cause), Volume IV. During keeping ultimate ***dhammas*** in mind,  the  beginner  person  can  take  into  heart  either  the  specific  character  (***sabhāva*** ***lakkhaņa***) or function (***rasa***), resulting in showing both kinds of the specific character and function of some mental concomitants. 

**PAGE-92** 

\4.  Section of way of keeping mental ***dhammas*** in mind 

**4.A. How various lines are specified** 

As mentioned previously, during keeping mental ***dhammas*** in mind base-door-wise (***āyatana***-***dvāra***)  system  is  appropriate  method.  Those  persons  with  vehicle  of  ***samatha*** practice can begin to keep in mind factors of absorption and associating absorption ***dhammas*** beforehand. Those persons without absorption, however, must begin to keep in mind mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking objects corporeal ***dhammas*** as beginning, in accordance with explanations found in commentary called ***Aţţhasālinī***, that \_\_\_\_ 

* ***tam rūpam ārammāņam katvā uppannam vedanām saññam sańkhāre viññāņañca “idam arūpa” anti paricchindittvā” \_\_\_.*** 

***(Abhi-A-1-271)*** 

In this work \_\_\_\_ 

1. The  section  in  which  continuity  of  consciousness  of  eye-door-cognitive  process, continuity of consciousness of following mind-door-cognitive process and pure mind- door-cognitive process, which arise by taking visible-object are kept in mind, is called visible-object-line; 
1. The  section  in  which  continuity  of  consciousness  of  ear-door-cognitive  process, continuity of consciousness of following mind-door-cognitive process and pure mind- door-cognitive  process,  which  arise  by  taking  audible-object  are  kept  in  mind,  is called audible-object-line; 
1. The  section  in  which  continuity  of  consciousness  of  nose-door-cognitive  process, continuity of consciousness of following mind-door-cognitive process and pure mind- door-cognitive process, which arise by taking olfactory-object are kept in mind, is called olfactory-object-line; 
4. The section in which continuity of consciousness of tongue-door-cognitive process, continuity of consciousness of following mind-door-cognitive process and pure mind- door-cognitive process, which arise by taking sapid-object are kept in mind, is called sapid-object-line; 
4. The  section  in  which  continuity  of  consciousness  of body-door-cognitive process, continuity of consciousness of following mind-door-cognitive process and pure mind- door-cognitive process, which arise by taking tactile-object are kept in mind, is called tactile-object-line; 
4. The section in which either any kind or many kinds of these ***dhammas*** which are called ***dhamma***-object 
1) transparent corporeality……….(5) kinds, 
1) subtle corporeality……………(16) kinds, 
1) consciousness and mental concomitants; 
1) concept (***paññātti***), signs of full- concentration of mindfulness breathing or ***kasiņa***- object etc., are kept in mind, is called ***dhamma***-object-line respectively. 

**PAGE-93** 

Among those (6) lines, way of keeping ***dhamma***-object-line in mind is presented previously, due to presence of less numbers of kinds of consciousness of cognitive process in this line. It is very appropriate way for those persons with vehicle of ***samatha*** practice who want to transfer  ***vipassanā***  practice  through  making  absorption  as  fundamental  of  ***vipassanā***  discerning. 

**4.B  *samathayānika*  (person  with  vehicle  of  *samatha*  practice)  and  suddha*vipassanā* *yānika* (person with vehicle of pure *vipassanā* practice)** 

There are two ways of transferring ***vipassanā*** practice through making the absorption as fundamental of ***vipassanā***, i.e., (1) corporeal ***dhammas*** are kept in mind beforehand or (2) mental ***dhammas*** are kept in mind beforehand for those persons with vehicle of ***samatha*** practice and the former one is already presented in Volume I. That former way also concerns with for those persons with vehicle of pure ***vipassanā***, who lacks absorption.  

If the person with vehicle of ***samatha*** practice wants to keep in mind either 

1. mental ***dhammas*** after corporeal ***dhammas*** have been finished to keep in mind or 
1. mental ***dhammas*** beforehand without keeping  corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind beforehand,  he  has  to  follow  the  following  instruction  found  in  ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga***. 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-222)*** 

According to explanations found in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga***, firstly the practicing person must  enter  any  kind  of  acquired  absorptions,  excluding  neither-perception-nor-non- perception. Then he must emerge from that absorption; second he has to keep either factors of absorption or associating absorption ***dhamma*** in mind through characteristic, function etc. For beginners who are still discerning mental ***dhammas*** way of keeping either characteristic or function of mentality in mind will be presented previously. 

**PAGE-94** 

**4.C. *jhānasamāpattivīthi* (cognitive process of** attain**ment of absorption)** 

During keeping absorption mental ***dhammas*** in mind, there are two kinds of cognitive processes, i.e., 

1. ***ādikammikajhānavīthi*** (beginning absorption cognitive process)and 
1. ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***  (cognitive  process  of  attainment  of  absorption)  and  it  is explained that mental ***dhammas*** occurring in the latter cognitive process must be kept in mind beforehand. (***See Vs-2-222***) 

The term, ***ādikammikajhāna***  ***vīthi***, means the first cognitive process of absorption of ***meditator*** who attains the absorption as beginning. The term, ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***, means cognitive process of absorption which arises whenever one enters into acquired absorption over and over again in the continuum of oneself who has got five kinds of mastery in that absorption. 

It  will  be  very  difficult  to  discern  mental  ***dhammas***  occurring  in  the  beginning absorption cognitive process for ***samathayānika*** person. The reason why it is difficult is as follows:\_\_\_ 

When  ***samathayānika***  person  has  got  five  kinds  of  mastery  in  absorption  mental ***dhammas*** occurring in the beginning absorption cognitive process are not momentary present or continuity present ***dhammas*** but are ***addhā*** (life) present ***dhammas*** only. In the continuum of  that  practicing  person  those  mental  ***dhammas***  occurring  in  the  beginning  absorption cognitive process may be groups of mental ***dhammas*** which had arisen any period of  

1) numerous hours, or 
1) numerous days, or 
1) numerous months. 

Those  ***dhammas***  belongs  to  ***dhammas***  called  ***addhā***  ***paccuppanna***  (= present  life ***dhammas***). It will be very difficult to discern those ***dhammas*** which had arisen and ceased for last numerous hours or days or months for him. The commentator Sayadaw, therefore, explained  in  order  to  keep  absorption  ***dhammas***  within  ***jhānasamāpatti  vīthi***  in  mind beforehand. It is conformed with the preaching of ***Anupāda Sutta***. 

Momentary  present  only  can  be  called  ***paccuppanna***  (present)  certainly  while ***addhāpaccuppanna*** and continuity present are called ***paccuppanna*** in periphrasis method only. 

***ettha ca khaņādikathāva nippariyāyā. sesā sapariyāyā. (Vs-2-103)* PAGE-95** 

Either the practicing person who keeps mental ***dhammas*** in mind or the practicing person  who  performs  ***vipassanā***  discerning  on  mental  ***dhammas***  has  to  keep  mental ***dhammas***  in  mind  in  order  to  reach  momentary  present  from  continuity present.  This  is because only when he can break down four kind of compactness of mentality by penetrative knowledge can he reach the field of ultimate nature through insight. Only when the insight reaches into the field of ultimate nature can he attain the knowledge of Analyzing Mentality- Corporeality and he can reach the stage of Purification of View, resulting in reaching into ***anatta*** (non-self) through insight. The commentator ***Sayādaw***, therefore, instructed to keep in mind absorption ***dhammas*** within ***jhānasamāpattivīthi*** beforehand for ***ādikammika*** persons.  

However  the  practicing  person  can  discern  and  keep  in  mind  mental  ***dhammas*** occurring in beginning absorption cognitive process when he reaches the stage of Knowledge of  Discerning  Causes  and  Conditions  or  the  stage  of  Knowledge  of  Comprehension (***sammasana ñāņa***) in ***vipassanā*** stage during which both corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** occurring three periods called past, future, present are discerned as a whole, as mentioned in commentary called ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga***. (***Vs-2-245***) 

Furthermore there are also reviewing cognitive processes which reflect absorptions and  factors  of  absorptions.  Those  cognitive  process  are  inclusive  in  sensual  impulsions, resulting in omitting to present in this place. It is very easy to discern sensual impulsions for those practising persons who can discern continuity of consciousness of cognitive process which arise by taking object of corporeal ***dhamma***. In this place it will be presented on symbolic method showing beginning absorption cognitive process and ***jhānasamāpatti*** ***vīthi*** according to traditional teaching method of olden day teachers successively. 

Those  kinds  of  cognitive  processes  can  arise  in  the  continuum  of  Arahants  too. However, those cognitive processes are only mere functioning impulsions (***kiriyājavana***) in Arahants. Those kinds of cognitive processes are omitted in this work. Similarly \_\_\_\_ only continuity of wholesome impulsions of cognitive processes and continuity of unwholesome impulsions of cognitive processes, excluding mere functioning impulsions, are presented in the section of keeping in mind mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking corporeal ***dhammas*** also. 

**4.D. *ādikammika pathamajhānavīthi* (beginning first absorption cognitive process)**  

How it arises is that \_\_\_\_\_ 

When it is quite close to attain the full absorption called ***jhāna*** through frequent practicing on mindfulness of breathing among (25) kinds of meditation subjects which can give rise to occur first absorption \_\_\_\_\_ the object of brilliant sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing appears (in the life-continuum mind-clear-element). 

**PAGE-96** 

When it is quite close to attain the full absorption called ***jhāna*** through frequent practicing on mindfulness of breathing two times of life-continuum which take any kind of three objects called ***kamma***-***kammanimitta-gatinimitta*** which had been taken by impulsions adjacent to death of past life, i.e., life-continuum (vibration), life-continuum (cessation), arise successively  and  cease.  Afterwards  mind-door-adverting  and  (4)  times  of  impulsions  of access concentration i.e., ***parikamma***, ***upacāra, anuloma, gotrabhu***; in the continuum of retarded  wise  person  or  (3)  times  of  impulsions  of  access  concentration,  i.e.,  ***upacāra, anuloma, gotrabhu*** in the continuum of sharp wise person; and then one time of impulsion of full  absorption  (***appanā  samādhi  javana***)  arise  successively  and  then  it  falls  into  life- continuums  appropriately.  (It  should  be  understood  similarly  in  remaining  kinds  of ***ādikammika pathamajhānavīthi*** which arise by taking ***kasiņa***-objects, earth-***kasiņa***, white- ***kasiņa*** etc.) 

Diagram showing beginning first absorption cognitive process 

Retarded wisdom person = ***na-da-ma-pa-up-nu-go-jh-bh***…… 

Sharp wisdom person = ***na-da-ma-up-nu-go-jh-bh….*** 

It should be understood similarly on diagram of second absorption etc. 

***na = bhavangacalana*** = life-continuum (vibration) 

***da = bhavangupaccheda*** = life-continuum (cessation) 

***ma = manodvārāvajjana*** = mind-door-adverting which adverts ***paţibhāga nimitta***; 

***pa = parikamma*** = preliminary work which can arrange to arise full absorption; 

***up = upacāra*** = access which arises adjacent to full absorption 

***nu  =  anuloma*** =  adaptation  which  is  adaptable  to both preceding preliminary  work  and 

succeeding full absorption; 

***go = gotrabhu*** = trans-lineage which can sever sensual lineage 

***jh*** = ***jhāna*** = absorption which is capable of discerning fixedly and penetratively on object of ***paţibhāga nimitta***; 

(It  is  called  ***ārammaņūpanijjhānajhāna***  =  the  consciousness  which  discerns steadfastly and efficiently the object of ***paţibhāga nimitta***.) 

**4.E. *parikamma-upacāra-anuloma-gotrabhu* *Pāli Quotation (Vs-1-134) (Mahāţī-1-161)*** 

***Parikamma***  \_\_\_\_\_  A  kind  of  sensuous  access  concentration  impulsion  which  can accommodate to arise full absorption impulsions called ***mahaggata***, is called ***parikamma*** (= preliminary work). 

**PAGE-97** 

***Pāli Quotation (Mahāţī-1-161)*** 

As any place which is adjacent to a village or town is called ***upacāra*** (=access of village or town) sensuous access concentration impulsion which arises just after preliminary work can be designated as ***upacāra*** (access), due to adjacent occurrence from full absorption, in other words, due to capable of arising adjacent to full absorption. 

There may be ambiguous fact that if it is designated as ***upacāra***, due to adjacent occurrence from full absorption, only trans-lineage called ***gotrabhu*** is ought to be designated as ***upacāra***, resulting in explaining again as ***samīpacārattā*** (vicinity). According to this word, it  should  be  recognized  sensuous  impulsions,  which  arise  vicinity  of  full  absorption impulsions, which arise anterior to the translineage, are called ***upacāra*** but the trans-lineage is not called ***upacāra***. It is right \_\_\_\_\_ the ***dhamma*** which arises vicinity place without very far can be said ***samīpacārī*** (= the ***dhamma*** which arises access place) even though it is not adjacent one. (***Mahāţī-1-161***) 

***anuloma*** \_\_\_\_\_ Sensuous access concentration impulsion called ***anuloma*** (=adaptation) is capable of not only performing function of preceding preliminary works continuously but also  arising  of  succeeding  full  absorption.  It  is,  therefore,  designated  as  adaptation (***anuloma***).  In  this  case,  the  term,  preceding  preliminary  works,  means  all  kinds  of impulsions which arise within preceding cognitive processes with various adverting before full absorption cognitive process, but not ***parikamma*** (preliminary work) which exists within the full absorption cognitive process, because those are capable of providing to arise full absorption impulsions. (***Vs-1-134, Mahāţī-1-161***) 

***gotrabhu***  \_\_\_\_  Among  these  sensuous  access  concentration  impulsions,  the  last  one  is designated as ***gotrabhu*** (***gotrabhū*** = trans-lineage), due to occurrence of not only overcoming on the sensuous lineage but also proliferating lofty lineage. 

Those (4) times of impulsions in the continuum of retarded wisdom person, and (3) times of impulsion in the continuum of sharp wisdom person, which have got characteristics mentioned above are sensuous ***dhammas***, which are more powerful and efficient than normal sensuous consciousness; which have got five factors of absorption called ***vitakka***, ***vicāra***, ***pīti***, ***sukha***, ***ekaggatā***. 

If it is said through preaching methodology called ***a-gahitaggahananaya*** (= untaking one must be inferred method), among (4) times of sensuous access concentration impulsions within full absorption cognitive process which arises in the continuum of retarded wisdom person,  

1. the first impulsion is called ***parikamma***; 

**PAGE-98** 

2. the second impulsion, ***upacāra***; 
2. the third impulsion, ***anuloma***; 
2. the fourth impulsion, ***gotrabhu***; 
2. the fifth impulsion, full absorption consciousness, respectively, while among (3) times of those impulsions which arise in the continuum of sharp wisdom person, 
1. the first impulsion is called ***upacāra***; 
1. the second impulsion, ***anuloma***; 
1. the third impulsion, ***gotrabhu***; 
1. the fourth impulsion, full absorption consciousness, respectively. (***Vs-1-134***) 

All kinds of these consciousness of cognitive process, from beginning of mind-door- adverting,  take  object  of  any  kind  of  ***paţibhāga  nimitta***  (sign  of  full  concentration)  of mindfulness of breathing, ***kasiņa***-object etc. Life-continuum take object of any kind of three objects called action emblem of action emblem of destination; which had been taken by impulsions adjacent to death of past life. Those objects are different fro m each other. The righteous ***meditator*** has opportunity to  know how the life-continuum takes what  kind of object when he reaches to the stage of    Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition in Section of Dependent-Origination. 

6. **Diagrams  showing  *jhānasamāpatti  vīthi*  (Cognitive  process  of**  attain**ment  of absorption)** 

Retarded wisdom person } ***na-da-ma-pa-up-nu-go-jh-jh-numerous times*** Sharp wisdom person} ***na-da-ma-up-nu-go-jh-jh-numerous times*** 

The  continuity  of  consciousness  cognitive  process,  which  enters  into  acquired absorption over and over again with the purpose of these intentions, i.e., 

1) in order to be steadfast the acquired absorption 
1) in order to reach mastery condition; 
1) in order to attain bliss of absorption in recent life; 
1) in order to make fundamental of Super-Psychic-Knowledge (***Abhiñāņa***); 
1) in order to make fundamental of ***vipassanā*** practice, 

is  called  ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***.  In  this  section,  only  (4)  kinds  of ***jhānasamāpattivīthi*** i.e., 

1) first ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***; 
1) second ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***; 
1) third ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***; 
1) fourth ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***, in the aspect of tetrad method, are presented. 

Furthermore  way  of  keeping  in  mind  absorption  mental  ***dhammas***  through mindfulness  of  breathing  route  will  be  presented  previously  because  only  practice  of mindfulness of breathing is presented as priority in the section of concentration in this work. 

**PAGE-99** 

7. **Mental *dhammas* of the first absorption of mindfulness of breathing** 

The righteous ***meditator*** must take into heart practice of mindfulness of breathing again. He has to develop concentration by taking object of brilliant sign of full-concentration of mindfulness of breathing (= he has to enter the first absorption concentration again). 

When five factors of absorption called ***vitakka***, ***vicāra***, ***pīti***, ***sukha***, ***ekaggatā***, become apparent, he must keep those factors’ of absorption in mind previously after emerging from absorption. He has to try to see synchronous arising of five factors of absorption over and over again. When factors of absorption become apparent extremely \_\_\_ 

1. life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind, and then 
1. sign of full concentration of mind-fullness of breathing must be taken as object again. At  that  time  that  object  of  sign  of  full-concentration  will  be  present  without 

disappearing because it is the period just after emerging from absorption. When sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing appears in the life-continuum mind-clear-element factors of absorption can be kept in mind easily because those factors of absorption are very obvious in his continuum. 

To  be  noticed  \_\_\_\_  Although  mind-door-adverting,  preliminary  works  access, adaptation, trans-lineage which are sensuous consciousness are also included in the continuity of ***jhānasamāpattivīthi***, it is instructed to keep factors absorption and associating absorption ***dhammas*** in mind beforehand, due to presence of instruction in a way that\_\_\_\_ 

***\*“vitakkādīni  jhānańgāni  tamsampayuttā  ca  dhammā  lakkhaņarasādivasena pariggahetabbā.” (Vs-2-222)*** 

After keeping those ***dhammas*** in mind thoroughly consecutive order of consciousness of absorption cognitive process must be kept in mind again. 

Although  there  are  variation  as  sensuous  ***dhammas***,  lofty  ***dhammas***  in  sensuous access concentration impulsions called ***parikamma***, ***upacāra***, ***anuloma***, ***gotrabhu*** and full absorption impulsion numbers of consciousness and mental concomitants are the same as each other within this first absorption cognitive process. They have got the same nature of impulsions which are capable of arising forcefully. They have also got the same objects, i.e., sign  of  full-concentration  of  mindfulness  of breathing.  (This  is  said ***ānāpāna***  as priority because this section emphasis on the mindfulness of breathing.) 

Therefore  those  impulsions  called  ***parikamma***,  ***upacāra***,  ***anuloma***,  ***gotrabhu***  are called  sensuous  access  concentration  impulsions  because  they  associate  with  the concentration  which  usually  arises  access  of  full  absorption  impulsion  (***appanājhāna javana***). During that access concentration moment factors of absorption become apparent too. However they do not reach into the stage of completion of efficiency called ***thāmagata***. Therefore those persons with weak knowledge in ***Abhidhamma*** can not differentiate those terms  called  ***parikamma***,  ***upacāra***,  ***anuloma***,  ***gotrabhu***  but  only  impulsions  which  arise adjacent to the full absorption consciousness. 

**PAGE-100** 

When factors of absorption and associating absorption ***dhammas*** which are occurring within full absorption impulsion can be kept in mind successfully the righteous ***meditator*** can keep mental ***dhammas*** within access absorption impulsions in mind easily. Therefore those practicing persons who  face with difficulty  must discern numerous  arising of impulsions together with mind-door-adverting sometimes. That way of discerning is not conformed with sequence of continuity of consciousness of cognitive process but it is very easy and practical way for those person with retarded wisdom. 

***Way of discerning as beginning*** 

When  five  factors  of  absorption  appear  apparently  in  the  insight  the  righteous ***meditator*** try to see incessant arising of those factors in each mind moment occurring in ***jhānasamāpatti*** ***vīthi***, one after another. Afterwards associating absorption ***dhammas*** within each mind moment must be kept in mind through any kind of three ways of discerning on mental ***dhammas***, viz., 

1. consciousness as beginning, 
1. feeling as beginning, 
1. contact as beginning, until all (34) mental ***dhammas*** are thoroughly discerned. For those  persons  with  retarded  wisdom,  (34)  kinds  of  the  first  absorption  mental ***dhammas*** will be presented again in this place as follows:\_\_\_\_ 

(34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of first absorption 

1. ***citta*** (consciousness) = nature of acquiring object of ***ānāpānapaţtibhāga*** ***nimitta***; [***vijānanam ārammaņassa upaladdhi, (Mūlaţī-1-87)*** = knowing object means nature of acquiring that object only. Unless object is acquired, it can not be said that object is not known.] 
1. ***phassa***  (contact)  =  the  nature  of  touching  with  the  object  of  ***ānāpāna***  ***paţibhāga nimitta***(characteristic); 
- the  nature  of  connecting  between  object  of  ***ānāpānapaţibhāga*** 

***nimitta***  (function); 

**PAGE-101** 
PAGE39
