***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**SECTION OF *NĀAMAKAMMAŢŢHĀNA*** 

(**PRACTICE ON MENTALITY**) **VOLUME II**  

**Page 551 - 599** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**&** 

**Dr. Khin Maung Aye (Ph.D, Messey)** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiţakadhara*)** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE39

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE-551** 

It should, therefore, be recognized that every initial application, which associates with any kind, the first absorption or all kinds of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, ***nāmarūpa pariccheda ñāņa***  (Knowledge  of  Analyzing  Mentality-Corporeality)  etc.,  has  got  designation  as ***nekkhamma***  ***sankappa***  =  ***sammā  sankappa***.  During  analyzing  and  scrutinizing  specific character of each ultimate element, ***sammā sankappa*** which performs initial application of the mind towards objects of those various specific characters might be numerous varieties depending on numbers of ultimate elements. There will be numerous varieties of factors of Path of ***sammā sankappa*** by taking objects on the whole, twofold corporeality-mentality method, fivefold aggregates method etc. This factor of Path called the Right Thought is very beneficial to attain various ***vipassanā*** right view knowledge, ***nāmarūpa pariccheda*** ***ñāņa*** etc. The factor of Path of Right View realizes the object which is applied by the factor of path of Right Thought, as it really is. 

\3. ***sammāvācā*** (Right Speech) 

There are four kinds of refraining, viz., 

1. ***musāvādā veramaņi*** = refraining from lying, 
1. ***pisuņavācā*** ***veramaņi*** =refraining from slandering, 
1. ***farusavāsā*** ***veramaņi*** = refraining from rough language, 
1. ***samphappalāpā*** ***veramaņi*** = refraining from idle talk, 

which are four kinds of the Right Speech (***sammāvācā***). 

Due to occurrence of difference of perceptions of refraining from lying etc., the Right Speech have also got variations in practices of mindfulness foundation previous to the Noble Path (***pubbabhāga*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** ***magga***). 

At the Noble Path (-moment) a single abstinence (***viratī***) which is the wholesome deed, arises after  fulfilling  (8)  factors  of  Noble  Path  by  means  of  accomplishing  so  as  not  to  arise unwholesome speech which arises in four sources of verbally misdeeds after severing route of unwholesome volition which is the factor to become as immoral person (***dussīlya***).This wholesome abstinence (***kusala*** ***viratī***) is designated as the Right Speech. (***M-1-88, Di-A-2- 392***) 

**4. *sammākammanta* (Right Action)** 

These three kinds of refraining i.e., 

1. ***pāņātipātā veramaņi*** = refraining from killing beings, 
1. ***adinnādānā*** ***veramaņi*** = refraining from taking what is not given, 
1. ***kāmesumicchācārā veramaņi*** = refraining from sexual misconduct, 

are, ***bhikkhus***…..,designates as “Right Action (***sammā kammanta***)”. (***M-1-88***) 

Due to occurrence of difference of perceptions of refraining from killing being etc., the Right Action have also got variations in practices of mindfulness foundation previous to the Noble Path (***pubbabhāga*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** ***magga***).At the Noble Path (-moment) a single abstinence (***viratī***) which is the wholesome deed, arises after fulfilling (8) factors of Noble Path by means of accomplishing so as not to arise unwholesome action which arises in three sources of bodily misdeeds after severing route of unwholesome volition which is the factor to  become  as  immoral  person  (***dussīlya***).This  wholesome  abstinence  (***kusala***  ***viratī***)  is designated as the Right Action. (***Di-A-2-392***) 

**PAGE-552** 

5. ***sammā ājīva* (Right Livelihood)** 

And, ***bhikkhus***, what is Right Livelihood? ***Bhikkhus***, the Noble disciple following my Teaching completely refrains from a wrong way of livelihood called bodily misdeed and verbally misdeed which concern with livelihood, and makes his living by a right means of livelihood. This kinds of livelihood, ***bhikkhus***, is called the Right Livelihood. (***M-1-89***) 

Due to occurrence of difference of perceptions of refraining from showing wonderful things in order to attain reverence of layman and laywoman devotees (***kuhana***) etc., the Right Livelihood which is worth praising by the Exalted One have also got variations in practices of mindfulness foundation previous to the Noble Path (***pubbabhāga*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** ***magga***). At the Noble Path (-moment) a single abstinence (***viratī***) which is the wholesome deed, arises after  fulfilling  (8)  factors  of  Noble  Path  by  means  of  accomplishing  so  as  not  to  arise unwholesome  wrong  way  of  livelihood  which  arises  in  seven  sources  of  three  bodily misdeeds and four verbally misdeeds after severing route of unwholesome volition which is the factor to become as immoral person (dussilya).This wholesome abstinence (***kusala*** ***viratī***) is designated as the Right Livelihood. (***Di-A-2-392***) 

During mundane mind moments these three kinds of actors of Path, Right Speech, Right  Action,  Right  Livelihood  do  not  arise  simultaneously  together  with  ***vipassanā*** knowledge but they arise separately. These three factors are inclusive in (8) kinds of factors Path called the way of practice leading to the cessation of ***dukkha***. Every virtuous person who is longing for ***nibbāna*** must fulfill all these factors thoroughly. Some persons do not want to regard purification of virtue during performing ***vipassanā*** practice through referring to example of a high official of the royal court, called ***Santati***, who was a drunkard, who became Noble One, and example of a murderer called ***Angulimāla*** who also became Arahant. Although ***Santati*** was drunk before facing with the Exalted One, during listening ***dhamma*** preached by the Exalted One he wore off effect of alcohol and the nature of purification of virtue appeared in him. Wholesome volition with restraining so as not to do misdeed in future appeared in him. Those wholesome volitions are factors of purification of virtue. Furthermore the period at which Noble (8) factors of Path must be fulfilled was the period while ***Santati*** was listening ***dhamma*** from the Exalted One. Due to presence of ability to fulfill Noble (8) factors of Path within that period, he became an Arahant really. Although ***Angulimāla*** was a murderer as layman life, as soon as he ordained as ***bhikkhu*** life his virtue was purified. Due to presence of ability to fulfill Noble (8) factors of Path, the Most Venerable ***Angulimāla Mahā Thero*** reached into the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant. 

**PAGE-553** 

6. ***sammāvāyāma* (Right Effort) *Pāli Quotation (M-1-89)*** 
1) And, ***bhikkhus***, what is Right Effort? ***Bhikkhus***, the ***bhikkhu*** following my teaching generates enthusiasm, makes effort, rouses energy, applies his mind and strives most ardently to prevent the arising of evil de-meritorious states of mind which have not arisen yet. 
2) He generates enthusiasm, makes effort, rouses energy, applies his mind and strives most ardently to abandon evil de-meritorious states of mind which have arisen. 
2) He generates enthusiasm, makes effort, rouses energy, applies his mind and strives most ardently to bring forth the meritorious states of mind which have not arisen yet. 
2) He generates enthusiasm, makes effort, rouses energy, applies his mind and strives most  ardently  to  maintain;  to  prevent  lapsing;  to  improve;  to  proliferate  the meritorious states of mind and to accomplish practice of both ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā***. This kind of endeavouring, ***bhikkhu***, is called Right Effort. (***M-1-89***) 

**6. (1) *anuppanna* *akusala*  *Pāli Quotation (Di-A-2-392, 393) (Di-ţī-2-346)*** 

In  the  infinite  rounds  of  rebirth  called  ***samsāra***  there  was  no  evil  unwholesome ***dhamma*** which had not arisen yet in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of any being. In this case, the evil unwholesome ***dhamma*** which has not arisen yet (***anuppanna*** ***akusala***) means those un-experienced unwholesome deeds by means of non-arising incessantly in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of any one in any life. There are numerous objects which have not experienced yet in one life of any being really. Un-experienced unwholesome deeds which arise depending on un-experienced objects; by means of un-experienced objects in any life, are called ***anuppanna*** ***akusala***. 

**PAGE-554** 

When the practicing person sees those two kinds of ***anuppanna*** ***akusala*** in other, through bearing in mind in a way that “unless evil unwholesome ***dhammas*** with this nature arise in  me, it will be very nice”, he brings forth enthusiasm; which can be said the practice that is worth fulfilling previous to the Noble Path; which has the efficiency to accomplish both  ***samatha***  and  ***vipassanā***  practices,”  he  endeavours;  he  generates  bodily  energy  and mentally energy; he rouses energy; he applies his mind and strives most ardently so as not to arise ***anuppanna*** ***akusala*** in him.  

Through  surrounding  with  strenuous  effort  which  has  four  kinds  of  strong determination that “I never fall back what is available through men’s diligence, even though  

1. the skin might be left, 
1. any line of streak of artery, vein, nerve might be left, 
1. the bone might be left, 
1. flesh and blood might be dried up”, he applies his mind and strives most ardently to fulfill both ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practices. 

**6.(2) *uppanna* *akusala*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Di-A-2-393)*** 

Experienced unwholesome deeds (***uppanna*** ***akusala***) means those evil unwholesome ***dhammas***  which  have  arisen  before  by  means  of  incessant  arising  in  the  continuity  of corporeality-mentality of oneself. Those unwholesome deeds which had arisen were already finished to arise and perish away in the past. It is no need to endeavour so as not to arise those  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  which  had  ceased.  The  practicing  person  must,  therefore, endeavour so as not  to arise only unwholesome ***dhammas*** which are similar to experienced unwholesome ***dhammas***. Because unwholesome deeds which had experienced previously and unwholesome ***dhammas*** which will arise in future have the same character through incessant arising unwholesome kinds each other, those unwholesome ***dhammas*** which must be prevent so as not to arise again are also called ***uppanna*** ***akusala*** through preaching methodology called ***sadisūpacāra*** (= same character). (***Di***-***ţī***-***2-346***) 

In order to abandon those unwholesome ***dhammas*** through bearing in mind in a way that “unwholesome ***dhammas*** which are similar to previous experienced ones by means of incessant  arising  nature  should  not  be  arisen  in  me”,  the  practicing  person  brings  forth enthusiasm which has the efficiency to accomplish both ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practices; he endeavours; he generates bodily energy and mentally energy; he rouses energy; he applies his mind  and  strives  most  ardently  to  fulfill  both  ***samatha***  and  ***vipassanā***  practice  through surrounding with strenuous effort which has four kinds of strong determination. 

**PAGE-555** 

**6 (3) *anuppanna* *kusala*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Di-A-2-393) (Di-ţī-2-346)*** 

Wholesome deed which has not arisen yet in continuity of corporeality-mentality of oneself  (***anuppanna***  ***kusala***)  means  absorption  ***dhammas***,the  Path  ***dhamma***,  the  first absorption etc., which have not been acquired in the continuum of mind on oneself. There is no  practicing  person  who  had  not  acquired  absorption  ***dhammas***  along  with  the  infinite rounds of rebirth. When the world was totally destroyed at least absorption ***dhammas*** had been acquired appropriately, resulting in an experience of existing in *brahama*’s world. The wholesome deed called Noble Path-Knowledge is, actually, un-experienced one for worldly persons. It is real ***anuppanna*** ***kusala***. Unless absorption ***dhamma*** and the Path ***dhamma*** have been acquired in any life, in other words, in present life of such practicing persons, those ***dhammas*** can be designated as ***anuppanna*** ***kusala*** for those practicing persons. In order to obtain those ***anuppanna*** ***kusala***, the practicing person has to endeavour strenuously ***samatha*** and  ***vipassanā***  practices  through  surrounding  the  effort  with  four  kinds  of  strong determination. 

**6. (4) *uppanna* *kusala* *uppanñāņanti tesamyeva paţiladdhānam. (Dī-A-2-393)*** 

Acquired wholesome deed of absorption and wholesome deed of the Noble Path are called ***uppanna*** ***kusala***. Among those ***dhammas***, the wholesome deed of Noble Path has got the lifespan of one mind moment only. There is natural fixed law for only once of four kinds of wholesome Path (- moment). Therefore the practicing person is unable to be stable and to proliferate  those  wholesome  deeds  of  Noble  Path.  Both  wholesome  deed  of  ***vipassanā*** practice and wholesome deed of ***samatha*** practices which are fundamental of that ***vipassanā*** practice, which are factors of relation of determinative dependence for arising of wholesome deed  of  Noble  Path,  must  be  performed  in  order  to  be  steadfast  by  means  of  incessant continuity  of  practice  through  connecting  of  preceding  practice  and  succeeding  practice called  ***pabandhaţhiti***;  the  practicing  person  has  to  endeavour  so  as  not  to  disappear completely; he has to endeavour in order to improve step by step until reaching  into the Noble Path-Knowledge of Arahant; he endeavours; he generates bodily energy and mentally energy;  he  rouses  energy;  he  applies  his  mind  and  strives  most  ardently  to  fulfill  both ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practice through surrounding with strenuous effort which has four kinds of strong determination. If he practices in that way, not only ***anuppanna*** ***kusala*** will arise but ***uppanna*** ***kusala*** will also be improved exceedingly. 

There are also (4) kinds of Right Effort in this factor of Path of Right Effort, viz., 

1. endeavouring so as not to arise unwholesome ***dhammas*** which have not arisen yet; 
1. endeavouring so as to discard unwholesome ***dhammas*** which have arisen; 
1. endeavouring so as to arise wholesome ***dhammas*** which have not arisen yet; 
1. endeavouring so as to be improved wholesome ***dhammas*** which have arisen. 

**PAGE-556** 

Due to presence of variation in minds of meditation which are endeavouring in this way, there are also variation in the Right Effort during endeavouring ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practices  which  are  worth  practicing  previous  to  the  Noble  path  called  ***pubbabhāga*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** ***magga***. However at the Noble Path (-moment) a single wholesome effort arises through efficiency of capable of accomplishing four functions which are deserving to be fulfilled in these four situations by the factor of Path of Right Effort after accomplishment of factor of the Noble Path. This wholesome effort is called Right Effort. (It means the effort which  associates  with  the  Noble  Path  can  perform  in  order  to  accomplish  above  four functions simultaneously.) (***Dī-A-2-393***) 

**7. *sammāsati* (Right Mindfulness) *Pāli Quotation (M-1-89)*** 

- And, ***bhikkhus***, what is Right Mindfulness? 
1. ***Bhikkhus***, the ***bhikkhu*** following my Teaching discerns steadfastly on the “bodily constituents  (***kāya***)  through  strenuous  effort  which  can  burn  defilements;  through having  clear  comprehension  and  mindfulness  which  can  keep  in  mind;  through discarding covetousness and distress on corporeal world. 
1. The ***bhikkhus*** discerns steadfastly on the “feeling (***vedanā***) through strenuous effort which can burn defilements; through having clear comprehension and mindfulness which  can  keep  in  mind;  through  discarding  covetousness  and  distress  on  feeling world. 
1. The  ***bhikkhu***  discerns  steadfastly  on  the  “consciousness  (***citta***)  through  strenuous effort  which  can  burn  defilements;  through  having  clear  comprehension  and mindfulness which can keep in mind; through discarding covetousness and distress on consciousness world. 
1. The  ***bhikkhu***  discerns  steadfastly  on  the  “***dhamma***  phenomena  through  strenuous effort  which  can  burn  defilements;  through  having  clear  comprehension  and mindfulness which can keep in mind; through discarding covetousness and distress on ***dhamma*** world. 

**PAGE-557** 

***Bhikkhus***,  the  mindfulness  which  is  capable  of  keeping  in  mind  and  recollecting objects called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** in this way is called the right Mindfulness. (***M-1- 89***) 

Three kinds of ***dhammas*** which must be fulfilled 

During developing these four kinds of mindfulness foundation ***dhammas*** there are three kinds of ***dhammas*** which must be fulfilled, viz., 

1) ***ātāpī*** = strenuous effort 
1) ***sampajāna*** = clear comprehension  
1) mindfulness. 
1) ***ātāpī*** = strenuous effort Other  ***dhammas***,  right  view  etc.,  has  also  got  the  efficiency  which  can  burn defilements through discarding temporarily or for a long time. However, because efficiency of the strenuous effort is more obvious, it is preached as ***ātāpī*** (= the ***dhamma*** which can burn defilements.  In  the  next  method  \_\_\_\_  during  discarding  opposite  defilements  through temporarily  or  for  a  long  time, because  the  strenuous  effort  is  capable  of burning  those defilements exceedingly by means of cause to endeavour unduly on associating ***dhammas*** within one mind moment, only strenuous effort can be designated as ***ātāpī***. (***Dī-ţī-2-294***) 
1) ***sampajāna*** = clear comprehension 

***Pāli Quotation (Dī-ţī-2-294)*** 

Clear comprehension (***sampajāna***) means  

1) well knowing through varieties 
1) knowing through circumstantial varieties 
1) knowing through comformable varieties 
1) The knowledge which is capable of penetrative knowing and seeing the phenomena during discriminating on both ultimate corporeal ***dhammas*** within every corporeal unit in a way that “this is ***paţhavī***; this is ***āpo***; this is ***tejo***; this ***vāyo***” etc., and ultimate mental ***dhammas*** within every mind moment in a way that “this is ***phassa***; this is ***vedanā***; this is ***saññā***; this ***cetanā***; this is ***viññāņa***” etc., as they really are, is called ***sampajāna***. It is clear comprehension through varieties. 

**PAGE-558** 

This ***sampajāna*** never discern ***paţhavī*** as ***āpo***; it never discern ***tejo*** as ***vāyo***; it never discern ***phassa*** as ***vedanā***; it never discern hot nature or cold nature as ***vedanā***; it discerns ***paţhavī*** as ***paţhavī***; it discerns ***tejo*** as ***tejo***; it discerns ***phassa***, as ***phassa***; it discerns ***vedanā***, as ***vedanā***; it discerns hot nature or cold nature as corporeality and so forth. It should be understood in similar way. 

2) During discriminating on each ultimate corporeal nature or ultimate mental nature in that way, it must be performed through characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate cause (***lakkhaņa-rasa-paccupaţţhāna-padaţţhāna***). It is not enough to discriminate only single ultimate nature of corporeality or mentality. Every ultimate nature within each corporeal unit or every ultimate nature within each mind moment must be discriminated through characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate cause. This kind of penetrative knowing is  called  ***sabbākārapajānana***  (=  clear  comprehension  through  all  varieties  of phenomena). Furthermore\_\_\_ 

the penetrative knowing  on the phenomena that “due to arising of causal ***dhammas***, i.e., ignorance-craving-clinging-formations-action,  how  consequence  corporeality-mentality arise”  and  “due  to  cessation  of  causal  ***dhammas***,  i.e.,  ignorance-craving-clinging- formations-action,  how  consequence  corporeality-mentality  cease”,  is  also  called ***sabbākārapajānana*** (= clear comprehension through all varieties of phenomena). And then that ***sampajāna*** can discriminate nature of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***asubha*** of those corporeality-mentality together with causal ***dhammas***. Clear comprehension through all varieties of phenomena is called ***sampajāna***. During comprehending in this way not only internal but also external living and non-living world are discriminated up to (31) realms as a whole. It is called knowing through circumstantial varieties. 

3) During clear comprehending on nature of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***asubha*** of all kinds of ultimate corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** together with their causal ***dhammas***, the knowledge discerns on those ***dhammas*** in conformity with ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***asubha*** in order to accomplish supra-mundane ***dhammas***, called successive ***vipassanā*** knowledge the Path-Knowledge, the Fruit-Knowledge but not as ***nicca***,  ***sukha***,  ***atta***,  ***subha***.  That  kind  of  knowing  through  comformable  varieties  of conditioned things is also called ***sampajāna***. 
3) ***satimā* = completion with mindfulness *Pāli Quotation (Dī-A-2-349)*** 

Third kind of ***dhamma*** which must be fulfilled by practicing person who develops mindfulness foundation is completion with mindfulness (***satimā***). It is completion with the mindfulness which capable of discriminating on five clinging aggregates called ***kāya***-***vedanā***- ***citta***-***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-559** 

This practicing ***bhikkhu*** who develops mindfulness foundation ***dhammas*** discerns steadfastly  on  objects  called  ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***  through  discriminating  with  the help of knowledge. It is right \_\_\_\_ There is no contemplating knowledge (***anupassanā*** ***ñāņa***) which is capable of repeated discerning on ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** over and over in the continuum of mind of ***bhikkhu*** who is lacking mindfulness. The Exalted One, therefore, preached that “***satiñca khvāham bhikkhave sabbatthikam vadāmi***”, = the mindfulness is, actually, ***bhikkhus***, benefiting ***dhamma*** for both factors of enlightenment called wisdom, effort, bliss which are deserving to develop during calling back of the mind from object of practice and factors of enlightenment called tranquility, concentration, equanimity which are deserving to develop during wandering of the mind from object of practice”, thus I preach. 

The Exalted One preached in this way in ***Aggi Sutta, Bojjanga Samyutta (Sam-3-99)***. The mindfulness is, therefore, essential not only during encouraging the mind of meditation while it is falling back from object of practice but also during concentrating the mind of meditation in order to reach on to the object of practice while it is wandering from here to there mindfulness and wisdom 

According  to  this  explanation,  “***satiyā  ārammaņam  pariggahetvā  paññāya anupassati***”  (***Dī-A-2-349***)  it  should  be  recognized  on  mindfulness  and  wisdom  as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. The mindfulness can keep ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** in mind; while the wisdom knows penetratively on those ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** up to the field of ultimate nature. 
1. The  mindfulness  can  keep  causal  ***dhammas***  of  ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***  in  mind; while the wisdom knows penetratively on those causal ***dhammas***. 
3. The  mindfulness  can   keep  phenomena  of  ***anicca***,  ***dukkha***,  ***anatta***,  ***asubha***  of  ***kāya***- ***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** in mind; while the wisdom knows penetratively on phenomena of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***asubha*** of those ***dhammas***. 

Thus the practicing person discerns those ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** through that mindfulness  and  that  wisdom  over  and  over.  He  discerns  those  ***dhammas***  through surrounding of strenuous effort with four kinds of strong determinations. During discerning in that way he has to endeavour in order to know those ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** through abandoning covetousness and mentally disagreeable feeling temporarily or for a long time after bringing forth wholesome deeds, access concentration, full concentration etc. Two kinds of  ***dhammas***  which  are  worth  abandoning  are  covetousness  and  mentally  disagreeable feeling. Three kinds of ***dhammas*** which are worth fulfilling are strenuous effort, mindfulness, clear comprehension. 

**PAGE-560** 

Mundane stage-Supra-mundane stage 

Due to presence of variation in consciousness which are capable of keeping in mind (= in consciousness which are associating with mindfulness and wisdom) in such way, 

1. the consciousness which is capable of keeping “bodily constituents (***kāya***), in mind; 
1. the consciousness which is capable of keeping “feeling (***vedanā***), in mind; 
1. the consciousness which is capable of keeping “consciousness (***citta***), in mind; 
1. the consciousness which is capable of keeping “***dhamma*** phenomena in mind; there is variation in this Right Mindfulness in mundane mindfulness foundation practice; which must be fulfilled previous to the Noble Path; which is called ***pubbabhāga*** ***saţipaţţhāna***  ***magga***.  During  at  the  Noble  Path  (-moment),however,  a  single mindfulness  arises  by  means  of  accomplishing  the  function  of  knowing  after fulfilling  factors  of  Path  through  abandoning  delusion  which  is  capable  of concealing  on  four  situations  called  ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***  so  as  not  to  be known. This kind of mindfulness is called the Right mindfulness. (***Dī***-***A-2-393***) 

**What is *saţipaţţhāna*?** 

Now the righteous person should like to ask the question that “what is ***saţipaţţhāna***? It should be known on the answer also. 

1. The object on which mindfulness concentrates frequently is also called ***saţipaţţhāna*** (mindfulness foundation). 
1. The occurrence of overcoming hate and love of the Exalted One towards disciples who practice as three classes, is also called ***saţipaţţhāna***. 
1. The mindfulness (***sati***) is also called ***saţipaţţhāna***. (***Dī-A-2-343***) 
1. In ***Samudaya Sutta, Amata Vagga***, ***Saţipaţţhāna*** ***Samyutta, Mahāvagga Samyutta***, the  Exalted  One  preached  on  ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***  which  are  objects  of mindfulness, as ***saţipaţţhāna***. (***Sam-3-161***) 

Then in the ***Pāli*** Text called ***Paţisambhidā Magga*** it is preached that \_\_\_\_\_ 

“***kayo upatthanam no sati, sati pana upatthananceva satica***” (***Paţisam-3-406***) 

- ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** which are objects of foundation of  mindfulness for 

existing upon are called ***saţipaţţhāna***. In this method \_\_\_\_ objects which are foundation of mindfulness  are  called   ***saţipaţţhāna***  (=  ***patiţţhāti  asminti  paţţhānam,  satiyā  paţţhānam saţipaţţhānam***). 

In the next method \_\_\_ Objects which are significant foundation of mindfulness (= ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***) are called ***sţipaţţhāna*** ***(= padhānam thānanti vā paţţhānam, satiyā paţţhānam saţipaţţhānam). (Dī-A\_2-343, 344)*** 

2. ***Pāli Quotation (M-3-263)*** 
- The Exalted One subsisted on such mindfulness foundations; the Exalted One who 

subsisted on that mindfulness foundation is worth admonishing to ***sanghā***. There are three kinds of mindfulness of foundations. (***M-3-263***) 

**PAGE-561** 

In ***Vibhanga Sutta, Uparipaññāsa***, it is preached that the occurrence of overcoming on hate or love of the Exalted One toward disciples with three classes, i.e., 

1. the disciple who does not follow admonishment of the Exalted One, 
1. those disciples who are mixing up by two kinds, i.e., disciples who do not follow and disciples who follow admonishment of the Exalted One; 
1. the disciple who follows admonishment of the Exalted One, 

is called ***saţipaţţhāna***. 

In this method \_\_\_\_ the ***dhamma*** which is deserving to arise by mindfulness is called ***saţipaţţhāna*** (= ***paţţhapīyateti paţţhānam, satiyā paţţhānam saţipaţţhānam***). That ***dhamma*** which is deserving to arise means overcoming on love or hate towards disciples who are practicing  in  three  classes.  (***Dī-A-2-344***)  It  is  worth  emulating  exceedingly;  it  is  worth revering exceedingly; it is to be kept awareness for every teacher. 

\3.  ***cattāro saţipaţţhāna bhāvitā bahulīkata satta bojjhange paripūrenti***. (***M-3-124***) 

If four kinds of mindfulness foundations are developed, practiced over and over, (7) factors of enlightenment can be fulfilled. (***M-3-124***) 

In this ***sutta*** mindfulness only is preached as ***saţipaţţhāna***. 

In this method \_\_\_\_\_ 

“***paţţhātīti paţţhānam, satiyeva paţţhānam saţipaţţhānam***” 

- mindfulness  which  is  capable  of  existing  on  objects  called  ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-

***dhamma***, fixedly is called ***saţipaţţhāna***. 

In the next method \_\_\_\_\_ 

“***saraņaţţhena sati, upaţţhānaţţhena paţţhānam, sati ca sā paţţhānañcāti saţipaţţhānam, idamidhā dhippetam***” 

- due to presence of the meaning of remembering on objects called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-

***citta***-***dhamma***,  it  it  called  mindfulness.  Furthermore  the  mindfulness  is  capable  of remembering on even those objects which had been done, spoken for very long time ago. Due to presence of the meaning fixed existing on objects called those ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***, it is called ***paţţhāna***. Therefore it is not only the nature of remembering on objects called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** but also the nature of fixed existing on objects of those ***kāya***- ***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***, resulting in designation as ***saţipaţţhāna***. 

This third kind of meaning is worth desiring in concern with this ***Mahāsaţipaţţhāna Sutta***. (***Dī-A-2-344***)  

The essence is as follows:\_\_\_\_ 

1. The mindfulness which is capable of remembering, fixed existing on objects called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** is called ***saţipaţţhāna***. 
2. The mindfulness which is capable of remembering, fixed existing on objects of causal ***dhammas*** of ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** is called ***saţipaţţhāna***. 
2. The mindfulness which is capable of remembering, fixed existing on objects nature of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***asubha*** of causal ***dhammas*** and those ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***- ***dhamma*** is called ***saţipaţţhāna***. 

It is mundane mindfulness foundation which must be developed previous to the Noble Path (= ***pubbabhāga*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** ***magga***). 

**PAGE-562** 

4. At the Noble Path (-moment) the mindfulness which is capable of remembering, fixed existing  on  unconditioned  element,  ***nirodhasacca***  ***dhamma***,  is  called  Right Mindfulness  or  ***saţipaţţhāna***  which  is  the  Supra-mundane  ***saţipaţţhāna***.  This  the essence of above commentary. 

The  Noble  Path  ***dhamma***  associating  with  that  Right  Mindfulness  eradicates  absolutely delusion which conceals on both ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***, respective causal ***dhammas*** of those ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** and nature of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***asubha*** of ***kāya***- ***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** together with their causal ***dhammas***. When the ignorance called ***avijjā*** disappears, the Knowledge called ***vijjā*** appears. The mindfulness which associates with that ***vijjā*** (= Noble Path-Knowledge) is called ***saţipaţţhāna***, due to capable of remembering and fixed existing on object of ***nibbāna***. It is the Supramundane ***saţipaţţhāna***. 

In this ***Mahāsaţipaţţhāna*** ***Sutta***, actually, in accordance with this explanation\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ***“ekāyana magga vuccati pubbabhāga saţipaţţhāna maggo” (Dī-A-2-337)*** 

The Exalted One preached it with referring to mundane ***saţipaţţhāna*** which is worth fulfilling previous to the Noble Path called ***pubbabhāga*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** ***magga***. 

***ekāyana* (a single Route) *Pāli Quotation (M-1-70)*** 

- This route, ***Bhikkhus***, is a single path in order to attain purified mind of beings; in order to overcome  sorrow,  lamentation;  in  order  to  cease  bodily  pain  and  mentally  disagreeable feeling; in order to attain the Noble Path; in order to realize ***nibbāna***. That path is, really, these four kinds of mindfulness foundations. (***M-1-70***) 

According to this preaching of the Perfectly Self-Enlightened One, the Path leading to ***nibbāna*** is practice of four kinds of ***saţipaţţhāna*** previous to the Noble Path. There is no other path leading to ***nibbāna***, due to presence of a single route leading to ***nibbāna***. 

If one accepts the opinion that all opposite ways of practices are correct in such way that “there are various routes leading to ***nibbāna***; there are various ways of practices leading to  ***nibbāna***;  this  way  is  also  correct;  that  way  is  also  correct;  all  ways  are  correct  in accordance with their respective aspects”, it will be situation of uncertain to open or close the entrance of ***nibbāna*** for that righteous person. IT is impossible to say all contradict ways of practices are correct. It will be presented some examples. 

**PAGE-563** 

\1.  Those ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** which are objects of foundation of mindfulness are five  kinds  of  clinging  aggregates  (=  corporeal  and  mental  ***dhammas***).  Corporeal ***dhammas*** always arise through groups called corporeal units as natural fixed law. 

Only when those corporeal units can be analyzed and then (8) (9) (10) etc., kinds of ultimate nature of corporealities within various corporeal units can be distinguished by the help of insight knowledge, can it be said his insight reaches into the field of ultimate reality. Furthermore \_\_\_\_ mental ***dhammas*** also arise through consciousness free from cognitive process and consciousness of cognitive process as natural fixed law. They never arise through swerving from that route of fixed nature of mind. Only when (8) (11), (34) kinds etc., of specific nature of mental ***dhammas*** within various mind  moments  can  be  discerned  by  insight  knowledge  in  order  to  realize discriminately  the  insight  knowledge  in  order  to  realize  discriminately  the  insight knowledge will reach into the field of ultimate reality. 

1) A way of practice instructs that above corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind; (b) the next one, however, instructs that “these corporeality- mentality concern with the perfectly Self-Enlightened One with Knowledge of Omniscience; disciples are unable to discern those ***dhammas***”. 

These two kinds of contradict ways of practices cannot be said correct but only one must be correct. 

Furthermore \_\_\_\_ a way of practice instructs that the practicing person must discern the phenomena how present five resultant ***dhammas*** arise, due to past five causal ***dhammas***; how future five resultant ***dhammas*** arise, due to present five causal ***dhammas*** with the help of  ***anubodha ñāņa*** and ***paţivedha ñāņa***. It also instructs that practicing ***meditator*** must discern past  five  aggregates because past  causal ***dhammas***  are  inclusive  in  the past  five aggregates and he must discern future five aggregates because five kinds of future resultant ***dhammas*** are inclusive in future five aggregates; 

2) the next one, however, instructs that “***vipassanā*** discerning must not perform past and future ***dhammas***; it is no need to perform past and future but present ***dhammas*** only”. 

These two kinds of contradict ways of practices cannot be said correct but only one must be correct. 

1) Furthermore \_\_\_\_\_ a way of practice instructs that corporeality-mentality together with their causal ***dhammas*** must be discerned through three general characters called ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***; 

**PAGE-564** 

2) The next way of practice instructs that all three general characters are no need to discern but only one general character is enough; it also instructs that whatever kinds of concept or ultimate ***dhammas*** must be discerned as he likes. 

These two kinds of contradict ways of practices cannot be said correct but only one must be correct. 

1) Furthermore \_\_\_\_ a way of practice instructs that any kind of concentration, either access concentration or full concentration must be developed in order to know five kinds of clinging aggregates called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***, causal ***dhammas*** of those  corporeality-mentality  and  nature  of  ***anicca***,  ***dukkha***,  ***anatta***,  ***asubha***,  those corporeality-mentality together with causal ***dhammas***, as they really are; 
1) The  next  way  of  practice,  however,  instructs  that  it  is  no  need  to  develop concentration anymore. 

These two kinds of contradict ways of practices cannot be said correct but only one must be correct. 

There is a reasonable question that “why is only one way correct?” It can be answered that “it is because there is only one route leading to ***nibbāna*** but not two or three routes”. 

It is very important time to consider, scrutinize, weight the pros and cons, determine for every virtuous person who has heartfelt desire to attain ***nibbāna***, truth ***dhamma***. Try to search over and over for truth. Truth always exists apparently in nature. 

\8. ***sammāsamādhi*** (Right Concentration) ***Pāli Quotation (M-1-89)*** 

And, ***bhikkhus***, what is Right concentration? 

1. ***Bhikkhus***,  the  ***bhikkhu***  who  follows  my  teaching,  being  detached  from  sensual pleasures and unwholesome ***dhammas***, achieves and remains in the first absorption, which has ***vitakka*** (initial application of the mind), ***vicāra*** (sustained application of the  mind),  ***pīti***  (pleasurable  interest)  and  ***sukha***  (agreeable  feeling),  born  of detachment from the hindrances (***nīvaraņa***). 

**PAGE-565** 

2. Having  got  rid  of  ***vitakka***,  and  ***vicāra***,  the  ***bhikkhu***  achieves  and  remains  in  the second absorption with internal tranquility, with enhancement of one-pointedness of concentration,  devoid  of  ***vitakka***  and  ***vicāra***,  but  with  ***pīti***  and  ***sukha***  born  of concentration. 
2. Having been detached from ***pīti***, that ***bhikkhu*** dwells in equanimity (towards object of practice,  ***ānāpānapaţibhāga  nimitta***  etc.,)  with  mindfulness  which  is  capable  of remembering (on the object of practice) and clear comprehension (on the object of practice).  Bodily  agreeable  feeling  and  mentally  agreeable  feeling  are  also experienced  by  mentally  constituents  (***nāmakāya***).  Due  to  presence  of  such  third absorption, Noble Ones, the Exalted One etc., praise the person with that absorption in a way that “he has got equanimity (towards object of practice) and mindfulness which is capable of remembering (object of practice), he usually abides in ***sukha***”; he achieves and remains in that third absorption; 
2. Due  to  discarding  of  bodily  agreeable  and  disagreeable  feelings;  due  to  previous cessation of mentally agreeable and disagreeable feelings, that ***bhikkhu*** achieves and remains  in  the  fourth  absorption  which  arises  through  ***jhānupekkhā***  (called equanimity) and thorough purified mindfulness, which lacks pain or pleasure. 

This kind of concentration, ***bhikkhus***, is called Right Concentration. 

***Bhikkhus***, this principle of Noble Eightfold Path is called the Noble Truth of the Path Leading to the Cessation of ***dukkha***, (=***maggaariyasacca***). (***M-1-89***) 

These  absorption ***dhammas***  are  varied  in both  mundane practices  of ***saţipaţţhāna*** which are worth practicing previous to the Noble Path and at the Noble Path (-moment). In the stage of mundane practices of ***saţipaţţhāna*** which are worth practicing previous to the Noble Path it varies through attainments (***samāpatti***), first absorption, second absorption, third absorption, fourth absorption etc. It also varies at the Noble Path (-moment) through various kinds of Noble Path. 

In the continuum of mind of a practicing person the first Noble Path called ***sotāpatti magga*** associates with first absorption while those upper successive Noble Path might be associated with random kinds of absorptions, first absorption or second absorption etc. 

In the continuum of mind of another practicing person the first Noble Path called ***sotāpatti magga*** can associate random kinds of absorptions, second absorption etc., while those upper successive Noble Path might be associated with random kinds of absorptions, first absorption or second absorption etc. 

Thus with relating to absorptions, four kinds of Noble Path might be……… 

**PAGE-566** 

1. The same kinds each other (= all four kinds of Noble Path might be associated with  
   1) the first absorption (***paţhamajhānika magga***), 
   1) the second absorption (***dutiyajhānika*** ***magga***), 
   1) the third absorption (***tatiyajhānika*** ***magga***), 
   1) the fourth absorption (***catuţţhajhānika*** ***magga***) or 
1. different kinds each other (=some Noble Path associate with first absorption; some Noble Path associate with second absorption and so forth). 
1. the same kinds in some Noble Path. 

This  significant  difference  of  the  Noble  Path  is  produced  by  fundamental  absorption (***pādakajhāna***). (***Dī-A-2-393***) (It can be seen in detail in **Volume V, Section of *Vipassanā***.) 

**Way of discerning on (8) kinds of basic meaning of mundane factors of path** 

Ways  of  discerning  on  mundane  abstinence  mental  concomitants  ***(lokiya  virati cetasika)*** called mundane Right Speech, Right Action, Right Livelihood must be performed as presented previously in this volume. 

If ***vipassanā*** impulsions associate with knowledge, each impulsion consists of Right View, Right Thought, Right Effort ***(= vīriya)***, Right Mindfulness, Right Concentration ***(= one-pointedness)***. Those ***vipassanā*** impulsions called ***ñāņavippayutta*** do not consist of Right View. Please see carefully ways of discerning on mentality. 

In  these  various  mind-door-cognitive  processes,  viz.,  mind-door-cognitive  process which knows on only one corporeal ***dhamma***, the eye-transparent-element 

1. as eye-transparent-element, 
1. as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1. as ***anicca***, 
1. as ***dukkha***, 
1. as ***anatta***, 
1. as ***asubha***, 

if each impulsion is great wholesome deed associating with knowledge, it consists of those (5) factors of Path. When mental ***dhammas*** of those mind-door-cognitive processes are kept in mind the function of keeping those (5) factors of Path in mind is also inclusive. It should be understood similarly on ways of discerning on mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking objects of remaining corporeal ***dhammas***; ways of discerning on mental ***dhammas*** of mind-door-cognitive process which is discerning on all corporeal ***dhammas*** as a whole again; way of discerning on each mental ***dhammas***; ways of discerning on mental ***dhammas*** within either one mind-moment or continuity of one cognitive-process as a whole. 

**PAGE-567** 

When  one  has  reached  into  the  stage  of  ***vipassanā***  practice,  while  ***vipassanā*** knowledge are discerned by succeeding ***vipassanā*** knowledge in the way of discerning called ***arūpasattaka***  and  the  way  of  discerning  through  knowledge  of  Dissolution  called ***bhangañāņa***,  each  impulsion  of  great  wholesome  mind-door-cognitive  process,  which  is predominated with that discerned ***vipassanā*** knowledge, consists of those (5) factors of Path. It  is  discerning  on  mundane  (5)  factors  of  Path,  in  the  next  method,  it  is  discerning  on associating mental ***dhammas*** together with mundane (5) factors of Path again. It is knowing discriminately on mundane ***magga sacca dhammas*** as they really are. One must endeavour in order to know in this way. 

**70. How four kinds of *satipaţţhāna* is divided *Pāli Quotation* *(Abhi-A-2-273,274)*** 

It will be presented on two noticeable facts again before the essence of explanations of above commentary is presented. 

1. It should be kept awareness on the fact preached by the Buddha in ***Aparijānana*** ***Sutta***, that “unless all kinds of five aggregates ***(= corporeal and mental dhammas)*** are known discriminately  through  three  kinds  of  full  understanding  called  ***pariññā***,  it  is  not deserving to extinguish suffering of rounds of rebirth … R … Only when all kinds of five aggregates ***(= corporeal and mental dhammas)*** are known discriminately through three kinds  of  full  understanding  called  ***pariññā***,  it  is  deserving  to  extinguish  suffering  of rounds of rebirth. 
1. ***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Abhi-A-1-271)*** **PAGE-568** 

There are two kinds of practice, i.e., ***rūpakammaţţhāna*** and ***nāmakammaţţhāna*** in the stage of ***vipassanā*** practice and a practicing person begins to take into heart corporeal ***dhammas***  ***(=  rūpakammaţţhāņa)***.  Then  underived  corporealities  and  derived corporealities are distinguished and discerned as ***anicca*** etc. However only ***vipassanā*** discerning on pure corporeal ***dhammas*** can not bring forth the Noble-Path-Knowledge called ***vuţţhāna (= emerging)***, in the next method, ***vipassanā*** leading to emerge really. Mental ***dhammas*** must also be, therefore, discerned. 

After distinguishing and keeping ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***sańkhāra***, ***vinñāņa*** which arise by taking object of corporeal ***dhamma*** in mind as “these are mental ***dhammas***”, those  mental ***dhammas*** are discerned as ***anicca*** etc. ***(Abhi-A-1-271)*** 

According to instruction of this commentary, second, it must be kept awareness on this instruction that the Noble Path-Knowledge called ***vuţţhāna*** can not arise mere ***vipassanā*** discerning  on  either  pure  corporeal  ***dhammas***  or  pure  mental  ***dhammas***.  Afterwards  the essence of above commentary called ***sammohavinodani*** will be presented as follows:------ 

1. ***Kāyānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna*** 

During mundane practice of mindfulness foundation previous to the Noble Path these four kinds of ***satipaţţhāna*** ***dhammas*** are available in various consciousness. It is right, ------ 

1) Bodily constituents ***(rūpakāya)*** are distinguished and kept in mind through specific kind of consciousness, other than the consciousness which is factor of keeping feeling etc., in mind. 
2) Various kinds of feeling are distinguished and kept in mind through specific kind of consciousness,  other  than  the  consciousness  which  is  factor  of  keeping  bodily constituents ***(rūpakāya)*** in mind. 
2) Various kinds of consciousness are distinguished and kept in mind through specific kind of consciousness, other than the consciousness which is factor of keeping bodily constituents ***(rūpakāya)*** in mind. 
2) Various principles of ***dhammas*** are distinguished and kept in mind through specific kind of consciousness, other than the consciousness which is factor of keeping Bodily constituents ***(rūpakāya)*** in mind. 

[It means during performing practice of mundane ***satipaţţhāna***, there are various kinds of consciousness of mind-door-cognitive processes i.e., various consciousness of mind-door- cognitive process  which  keep  corporeal ***dhammas***  in  mind;  which  keep  feeling  in  mind; which keep consciousness in mind; which keep principles of ***dhamma*** in mind and so forth. Because all four kinds of ***satipaţţhāna*** are essential to be developed, there are also various discerning consciousness of mind-door-process accordingly.] 

However, at the Noble Path (- moment) these four kinds of ***satipaţţhāna*** ***dhammas*** are available  in  single  mind  of  objects  which  are  foundations  of  mindfulness,  called  ***kāya- vedanā-citta***-***dhamma***, the practicing person distinguishes and keeps corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind  as  beginning.  (It  does  not  mean  pure  corporeal  ***dhammas***  are  kept  in  mind.  All ***dhammas***  called  ***kāya-vedanā-citta-dhamma***  which  are  objects  of  foundations  of mindfulness are kept in mind.) 

**PAGE-569** 

The mindfulness which associates with practicing person’s ***vipassanā*** knowledge which has  achieved  through  distinguishing  on  corporeal  ***dhammas***  as  beginning,  is  called ***kāyānupassanā*** **(contemplation on bodily constituents)**. That practicing person who has got mindfulness associating  with ***vipassanā*** knowledge, is called ***kāyanupassī***. At the arising phase  of  Noble  Path-Knowledge  of  practicing  person,  who  performs  ***vipassanā***  practice successively and who just reaches into the Noble Path-Knowledge, the mindfulness which associates with the Noble Path-Knowledge is called ***kāyānupassanā***. The practicing person who has got that mindfulness is called ***kāyanupassī***. It should be recognized the commentator Sayadaw explained this word, due to presence of relating to ***vipassanā*** knowledge which is factor of arising of the Noble Path-Knowledge. 

2. ***vedanānupassanā* *satipaţţhāna*** 

The  mindfulness  which  associates  with  practicing  person’s  ***vipassanā***  knowledge which  has  achieved  through  distinguishing  on  feeling  (***vedanā***)  as  beginning,  is  called ***vedanānupassanā***  ***(***contemplation  on  feeling***)***.  That  practicing  person  who  has  got mindfulness associating with ***vipassanā*** knowledge, is called ***vedanānupassī***. At the arising phase  of  Noble  Path-Knowledge  of  practicing  person,  who  performs  ***vipassanā***  practice successively and who just reaches into the Noble Path-Knowledge, the mindfulness which associates with the Noble Path-Knowledge is called ***vedanānupassanā***. The practicing person who has got that mindfulness is called ***vedanānupassī***. 

3. ***cittānupassanā satipaţţhāna*** 

The meaning which associates with practicing person’s ***vipassanā*** knowledge which has achieved through distinguishing on consciousness as beginning, is called ***cittānupassanā*** (contemplation  on  consciousness).  That  practicing  person  who  has  got  mindfulness associating with ***vipassanā*** knowledge, is called ***cittānupassī***. At the arising phase of Noble Path-Knowledge  of practicing person,  who performs  ***vipassanā*** practice  successively  and who just reaches into the Noble Path-Knowledge, the mindfulness which associates with the Noble Path=Knowledge is called ***cittānupassanā***. The practicing person who has got that mindfulness is called ***cittānupassī***. 

4. ***dhammanupassanā satipaţţhāna*** 

The  mindfulness  which  associates  with  practicing  person’s  ***vipassanā***  knowledge which has achieved through distinguishing on ***dhamma*** phenomena as beginning, is called ***dhammānupassanā*** (contemplation on ***dhamma*** phenomena). That practicing person who has got mindfulness associating with ***vipassanā*** knowledge, is called ***dhammānupassī***. At the arising  phase  of  Noble  Path-Knowledge  of  practicing  person,  who  performs  ***vipassanā*** practice successively and who just reaches into the Noble Path-Knowledge, the mindfulness which  associates  with  the  Noble  Path=Knowledge  is  called  ***dhammānupassanā***.  The practicing person who has got that mindfulness is called ***dhammānupassī***. 

Thus previously the Noble preaching depends on the person. (***Abhi-A-2-273***) 

**PAGE-570** 

It means the preaching called ***satipaţţhāna*** which has preached emphatically through relating to ***vipassanā*** practice, which is factor of arising if the Noble Path, which is the route leading  towards  up  to  the  Noble  Path  of  four  kinds  of  persons  called  ***kāyānupassī***, ***vedanānupassī***, ***cittānupassī***, ***dhammānupassī***, depends on the person. It is right.   \_\_\_\_\_ It is impossible to say occurrence of fulfilment of numerous ***satipaţţhāna*** of a person.  

It is because it can reach not only the phenomenon in which numerous mindfulness ought to arise within one mind moment but also the phenomenon in which a single mindfulness knows penetratively on numerous mindfulness which have arisen. (***Mūlaţī-2-161***) 

**(V) 71 Efficiency of four kinds of *satipaţţhāna* *kāyeti rūpakāye*. (*M-A-1-246*)** 

1. The mindfulness, which is capable of distinguishing (= keeping in mind)corporeal ***dhammas***,  which  is  capable  of  discarding  on  wrong  knowing,  wrong  perceiving, wrong  viewing  called  ***vipallāsa***  ***dhammas***  (illusions)  on  “all  bodily  constituents (***rūpakāya***)” as ***subha*** (comely ones), is accomplished through the Noble Path. It is, therefore, called ***kāyānupassanā***. 
1. The  mindfulness,  which  is  capable  of  distinguishing  (=keeping  in  mind)  feeling, which is capable of discarding on wrong knowing, wrong perceiving, wrong viewing called  ***vipallāsa***  ***dhammas***  (illusions)  on  “feeling”  as  ***sukha***  (agreeable  ones),  is accomplished through the Noble Path. It is, therefore, called ***vedanānupassanā***. 
1. The  mindfulness,  which  is  capable  of  distinguishing  (=keeping  in  mind) consciousness, which is capable of discarding on wrong knowing, wrong perceiving, wrong  viewing  called ***vipallāsa***  ***dhammas***  (illusions)  on  “consciousness”  as ***nicca*** (permanent ones), is accomplished through the Noble Path. It is, therefore, called ***cittānupassanā***. 
1. The mindfulness, which is capable of distinguishing (=keeping in mind) ***dhamma*** phenomena, which is capable of discarding on wrong knowing, wrong perceiving, wrong viewing called ***vipallāsa*** ***dhammas*** (illusions) on “***dhamma*** phenomena” as ***atta***  (self),  is  accomplished  through  the  Noble  Path.  It  is,  therefore,  called ***dhammānupassanā***. 

Due  to  occurrence  of  capable  of  finishing  four  kinds  of  functions  by  a  single mindfulness which associates with the Noble Path-Knowledge, it has got designations as ***kāyānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna***, ***vedanānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna***, ***cittānupassanā satipaţţhāna***, ***dhammānupassanā***  ***satipaţţhāna***,  respectively.  It  is,  therefore,  explained  that “***lokuttaramaggakkhaņe pana eka citteyeva labbhanti*** = at arising of the Supramundane Noble Path (-moment) those are available in one mind moment only”. (***Abhi-A-2-273, 274***) 

If  ***dhammas***  which  are  demarcated  through  one’s  function  after  considering  on persons  are  preached,  a  single  mindfulness  has  also  got  many  designations,  such  as ***kāyānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna*** etc., due to presence of variations in functions. Due to presence of intention to show this meaning clearly, the commentary explained those words, “at the Supra  mundane  Noble  Path  (-moment)  a  single  mindfulness  has  got  four  kinds  of designations”. If it is said through alluding example, it is as follows. \_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-571** 

Function of the person means natural phenomena only. Because natural phenomena which  are  discerned  objects  of  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  are  varied  as  ***kāya-vedanā***-***citta***- ***dhamma***,  variation  in  persons  occurs  as  ***kāyānupassī***,  ***vedanānupassī***,  ***cittānupassī***, ***dhammānupassī***. Similarly \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

Function of any ***dhamma*** can not be performed by other ***dhamma***. Therefore due to presence of variation in natural phenomena, there is no variation in function of those natural phenomena.  Due  to  occurrence  of  non-deserving  to  accept  variation  in  function  through variation  in  ultimate  natural  phenomena  and  due  to  occurrence  of  deserving  to  accept variation in ultimate natural phenomena through variation in function, the mindfulness which is a single natural phenomenon accomplishes at the Noble Path (-moment)due to capable of discarding four kinds of ***vipallāsa*** ***dhammas*** (illusions). When four kinds of functions of mindfulness are accomplished at the Noble Path (-moment) in that way there will be any other advantage no more, but for the sake of discarding those four kinds of illusions only. A single mindfulness which associates with the Noble Path-Knowledge has got four kinds of designations through variations in functions of discarding four kinds of illusions only. This is the essence of above explanation found in commentary. (***Mūlaţī-2-161***) 

**(V) 72. Four stages of ways of practices** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-1-260) (Mūlaţī-1-112)*** 

After  developing  concentration  through  making  concentration  of  mindfulness  of breathing as fundamental of ***vipassanā*** knowledge it has been presented on cascade of ways of  discerning  of  ***rūpakammaţţhāna***,  and  ***nāmakammaţţhāna***.  According  to  explanations found in above commentary called ***Aţţhasālinī*** and sub-commentary called ***Mūlaţīkā***, four stages of ways of practices have been presented in those sections of ***rūpakammaţţhāna*** and ***nāmakammaţţhāna***. Those four stages are, viz.,  

1. ***rūpapariggaha***  =  discerning  on  un-derived  corporality  and  derived  corporeality through making bases of four great elements,  
1. ***arūpapariggaha*** = discerning (= keeping in mind) on mental ***dhammas***, 

**PAGE-572** 

3. ***rūpārūpapariggaha***  =  discerning  (=  keeping  in  mind)  on  corporeal  and  mental ***dhammas*** through characteristic, function, manifestation, proximate cause, with the help of penetrative insight knowledge, (In this stage ways of discerning on corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** through specific characteristic only, are presented. Remaining three ways, function etc., must be seen in Section of ***lakkhaņādi catukka***, Volume IV.) 
4. ***nāmarūpavavaţţhāna*** = distinguishing  and  keeping  mentality-corporeality in  mind that “there is no person, being, living being, ***atta*** (self) but corporeality- mentality only”; (in the next method, there is no person, being, living being, ***atta***, human being, heavenly being, *brahma*, but corporeality-mentality only. “) 

In  the  internal  continuum  these  four  stages  of  practices  have  been  presented successively.  It  should  be  recognized  distinguishing  and  keeping  those  four  stages  of practices in mind, step by step, can be said developing four kinds of ***satipaţţhāna***. Now it will be presented on the second stage of four kinds of ***satipaţţhāna*** as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

**(V) 73 Four kinds of *satipaţţhāna*-second stage  *Pāli Quotation (M-1-71)*** 

Thus he discerns steadfastly on the internal bodily constituents (= ***rūpakāya***, in the next method, both bodily constituents and mentally constituents) as bodily constituents; he discerns steadfastly on the external bodily constituents as bodily constituents; he discerns steadfastly on both internal and external bodily constituents as bodily constituents. (It was preached similarly on remaining (14) sections on ***ānāpāna, iriyāpatha*** etc.) 

***Pāli Quotation (M-1-75)*** 

Thus he discerns steadfastly on internal feelings as feeling; he discerns steadfastly on external feelings as feeling; he discerns steadfastly on both internal and external feelings as feeling. 

***Pāli Quotation (M-1-76)*** 

Thus he discerns steadfastly on internal consciousness as consciousness; he discerns steadfastly  on  external  consciousness  as  consciousness;  he  discerns  steadfastly  on  both internal and external consciousness as consciousness. 

***Pāli Quotation (M-1-77 to 90)*** 

Thus he discerns steadfastly on internal ***dhamma*** phenomena as ***dhamma*** phenomena; he discerns steadfastly on external ***dhamma*** phenomena as ***dhamma*** phenomena; he discerns steadfastly on both internal and external ***dhamma*** phenomena as ***dhamma*** phenomena. (***M-1- 77, 78***) 

It was preached similarly on remaining five sections, ***nīvaraņapabba, khandhapabba, āyatanapabba, bojjhangapabba, saccapabba***.) 

**PAGE-573 (V) 74 The rulings of olden day commentaries** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-1-270) (Abhi-A-1-270, 271, Vs-2-300)*** 

In the aspect of Supramundane Noble Path \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. after steadfast taking into heart internal five aggregates previously it emerges from internal aggregates; 
1. after steadfast taking into heart internal five aggregates previously it emerges from external aggregates; 
1. after steadfast taking into heart external five aggregates previously it emerges from external aggregates; 
1. after steadfast taking into heart external five aggregates previously it emerges from internal aggregates; 

Meanings of above explanation in detail are as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. In this noble Teaching, during taking into heart conditioned things called ***dukkha***- ***sacca*** ***dhamma***, ***samudaya*** ***sacca*** ***dhamma*** which are discerned objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge,  some  practicing  ***bhikkhus***  take  into  heart,  distinguish,  keep  in  mind, steadfastly  on  five  aggregates  existing  in  internal  continuum  of  themselves  (= oneself).  Afterwards  those  internal  five  aggregates  are  discerned  as  ***anicca***  etc. However the emerging (***vaţţhāna***) called Noble Path (= the Noble Path-Knowledge that  realizes  the  object  of  ***nibbāna***  through  emerging  from  object  of  sign  of conditioned things) does not arise through ***vipassanā*** discerning on pure internal five aggregates. External five aggregates must also be, therefore, discerned as ***anicca*** etc. Then  both  five  aggregates  of  others  and  non-living  conditioned  things  are  also discerned as “***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***”, alternately. 

That  practicing  person  discerns  internal  five  aggregates  sometimes;  he  discerns external five aggregates sometimes; that practicing person’s ***vipassanā*** knowledge connects with the Noble Path during discerning on internal aggregates. If it connects with the Noble Path in this way, it can be said…… after steadfast taking into heart internal five aggregates previously it emerges from internal aggregates; 

**PAGE-574** 

2. In the next kind \_\_\_\_\_\_if that practicing person’s ***vipassanā*** knowledge connects with the Noble Path during  discerning on  external aggregates, it can be said ….. after steadfast taking into heart internal five aggregates previously it emerges from external aggregates; 
2. It should be recognized similarly on both phenomenon that after steadfast taking into heart external five aggregates previously it emerges from external aggregates and  
2. the  phenomenon  that  after  steadfast  taking  into  heart  external  five  aggregates previously it emerges from internal aggregates. (***Abhi-A-1-270***) 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-A-2-59) (Sam-ţī-2-75)*** 

In above commentary of ***Kaļāra*** ***Sutta*** it is explained that after discerning on internal ***dhammas***, external ***dhammas*** also be discerned; and after discerning on external ***dhammas***, internal ***dhammas*** must also be discerned. Subcommentary of ***Samyutta*** also explains and supports  that  the  commentary  explains  to  discern  both  internal  ***dhammas***  and  external ***dhammas*** because all ***dhammas***, which are deserving to know called ***pariññeyya*** ***dhamma***, must be known penetratively. 

The Exalted One instructed that \_\_\_\_ 

1. sometimes internal ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***; 
2. sometimes external ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***; 
2. sometimes both internal and external ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***; 

must be distinguished, taken into heart,  kept in mind, discerned with the help of insight knowledge. 

Olden day commentaries also explained that \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. the Noble Path can not arise through ***vipassanā*** discerning on pure internal ***dhamma***, 
1. the Noble Path can not arise through ***vipassanā*** discerning on pure external ***dhamma***, 

Explanations of olden day commentaries are conformed with ***Pāli*** Texts preached by the Exalted One as mixture of water of rivers, the Ganges and Jumna. 

Which route do you follow? It is time to consider, scrutinize and determine for every virtuous person who wants to attain the Eternal Peace called ***nibbāna***. 

**PAGE-575 (V) 75. Send the knowledge towards external phenomena** 

After the righteous person finished to perform these four functions, viz. 

1. keeping corporeality in mind, 
1. keeping mentality in mind, 
1. keeping corporeality-mentality in mind, 
1. distinguishing and making mental note corporeality-mentality, 

he has to keep external ***dhammas*** in mind in similar way. Now it will be presented on the way of keeping external corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind as beginning. 

Internal corporeal ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind over and over. 

Afterwards, four great elements consisting in robe or clothes which is being worn by oneself must be discerned as beginning. He has to continue to discern four great elements consisting in robe or clothes, if he understands four great elements in robe or clothes. In the insight of righteous mediator who has reached into this stage specific characteristics of four great elements will be clear easily and then he will see only corporeal units in the near future. Those corporeal units are non-transparent ones called ***utujaojaţţhamaka*** (= pure octads with nutriment as eighth factor, produced by temperature). 

He  has  to  discern  those  corporeal  ***dhammas***  as  “corporeal  ***dhamma***,  corporeal ***dhamma***” after analyzing up to the field of ultimate nature. Sometimes sound is produced by rubbing pieces of clothes, in other words, by rubbing corporeal units each other. Those are sound nonads corporeal units called ***utujasaddanavaka kalāpa***. Those (9) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** must also be kept in mind through analyzing up to the field of ultimate nature. 

A noticeable fact \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

During discerning in that way, some practicing persons consider that they found not only non-transparent corporeal units but also transparent ones consisting in their clothes or robes. Actually, there is no transparent corporeal unit within clothes or robes. However there are very small insects or bacteria in nook and cranny of clothes or robes sometimes. At least there are body-transparent-element in the body of those minute insects or bacteria, resulting in seeing transparent corporeal units.  

**PAGE-576** 

Furthermore \_\_\_\_ if one discerns four great elements of one’s flesh after exceeding the clothes, he can see transparent corporeal units called body-decad with body-transparent- element. Therefore it should be recognized the fact there is no transparent corporeal unit in external non-living world called ***anupadinna***. There are only two kinds of corporeal units, i.e.,  pure  octad  produced  by  temperature  and  sound  nonad  produced  by  temperature  in external non-living world. It should be recognized similarly on the whole non-living world, tree, water, earth, forest, mountain etc., which are going to be presented later. 

When the righteous ***meditator*** can distinguish and keep ultimate nature of clothes in mind he must keep ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** consisting in (6) doors, (42) bodily parts of himself in mind again. He must perform alternate discerning on internal and external corporeal  ***dhammas***  over  and  over.  If  it  is  successful  to  discern  in  that  way,  he  has  to continue to discern  four  great  elements consisting in floor on which he is sitting.  When corporeal units can be seen he has to analyze ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas***. Then both kinds of internal and external ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** must be discerned alternately over and over. 

**Sharpness of insight knowledge** 

Unless it is successful to discern both corporeal units occurring in external non-living world and ultimate nature of those corporeal units, such as (8) kinds, (9) kinds etc., he must discern internal corporeal ***dhammas*** existing in (6) doors, (42) bodily parts over and over. Then ultimate nature of external non-living corporeal ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind easily because the knowledge of Discerning Corporeality which can keep internal corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind quickly benefits his insight knowledge through efficiency of relation of determinative dependence  (***upaniccaya  paccaya***).  When  he  can  discern  ultimate  nature  of  corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring in external non-living world he must keep internal corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind again. The Knowledge of  Discerning Corporeality becomes sharp and swift through alternate discerning on internal and external ***dhammas*** over and over. That sharp and swift insight knowledge can 

discern easily corporeal ***dhammas*** which are occurring in farther external non-living world. Therefore  he  ought  not  forget  to  perform  alternate  discerning  on  internal  and  external corporeal ***dhammas*** over and over. 

**PAGE-577** 

**Tree-water-earth-forest-mountain** 

When the righteous ***meditator*** discerns four great elements consisting in meditation hall he will see corporeal units and he has to analyze ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** within corporeal units. Then he must spread light of wisdom and his knowledge towards external world gradually.  

Whatever kind of non-living things existing in external world, i.e., tree-water-earth-forest- mountain which are touched with the light of wisdom, must be scrutinized in order to see four great elements emphatically. When corporeal units can be seen he has to analyze and ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind. Corporeal ***dhammas*** existing in both internal and external situations must be kept in mind alternately. Due to presence of sharp and powerful insight knowledge, when he discerns four great elements consisting in tree-water- earth-forest-mountain, he can see corporeal units easily. Some practicing persons usually see both non-transparent and transparent corporeal units minglingly. Corporeal units with body- transparent-element which are inclusive in animal beings, insects etc., which are existing in closely connected circumstance with those tree-water-earth-forest-mountain, are transparent corporeal units. 

Thus the righteous ***meditator*** endeavours to send his insight knowledge towards the whole non-living world gradually. After scrutinizing four great elements consisting in every non-living thing every corporeal unit must be analyzed to see ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas***. If any sound is produced by striking of two branches, or two leaves each other, those are sound nonads corporeal units to which he must scrutinize in order to see (9) kinds of ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas***. Non-living things occurring in all ten directions must be scrutinized in this way. Then all kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring in non-living things within (31) realms must be kept in mind continuously. 

If whatever kind of non-living thing which is occurring in wherever touched by the light of wisdom can be analyzed up to the field of ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas***, it is successful to keep corporeal ***dhammas*** of non-living world called ***anupādiņņa*** in mind. He does not see tree-water-earth-forest-mountain but piles of corporeal ***dhammas*** in his insight. 

**(V) 76. Towards external living worlds *Pāli Quotation (Mahāţī-1-434, 435)*** 

According to above explanation found in ***Mahāţīkā***, the righteous ***meditator*** has to take into heart four great elements occurring in external world. He has to scrutinize four great elements  occurring  in  living beings  who  are  dwelling  in  the place  at  which  the  light  of wisdom produced by Knowledge of Discerning Corporeality touches. 

**PAGE-578** 

When he sees corporeal units he has to analyze those corporeal units and ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind. At that time all beings, human beings and animals etc., who are wandering in the insight of practicing person, exist in the insight by means of collectiveness of four great elements only through abandoning forms and shapes of beings. Every behaviour done by those beings appears as the action manipulated by four great elements only in his insight. Those foods and drinks which are ingested by those beings also appear as collectiveness of four great elements which are put inside collectiveness of four great elements only in the insight knowledge. (***Mahāţī-1-434, 435***) 

These  words,  ***sattākāram  vijahitvā***  (=  through  abandoning  forms  and  shapes  of beings),  means  detachment  of  perception  of  being  (***satta  saññā***)  and  perception  of  self- identity (***atta*** ***saññā***). As mentioned in section on ***rūpakammaţţhāņa***, volume I, only when one discerns four great elements and he sees corporeal units only and he can keep four great elements within corporeal units in mind, those perception of being and perception of self- identity will be abandoned consequently. One must understand that it refers to this stage. Only when compactness is broken down can the insight knowledge reach up to the field of ultimate nature, resulting in reaching into the Knowledge of ***anatta***. Only when the insight knowledge reaches up to ***anatta*** can he abandon perception of being. Be careful! 

The reason why this explanation of ***Mahāţīkā*** is presented again is that the righteous ***meditator*** should not misunderstand on the fact way of discerning on external ***dhammas*** can be performed through hypothetical way but not practical way. Actually external ***dhammas*** must not be discerned through hypothetical way but practical way by which one must discern in order to reach ultimate nature with the help of experiencial insight knowledge. In order to know this fact reliable evidences of scriptures are presented in this work. 

When practicing person succeeds to discern corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring in external non-living world satisfactorily he can change to discern external living world easily. After developing concentration step by step he must keep corporeal ***dhammas*** existing in (6) doors, (42) bodily parts of himself in mind again. It is similar to the process by which the engine is started by motor just before car is driven. 

Afterwards the righteous ***meditator*** must discern four great elements existing in the person who is sitting closely in front of himself. In order to see that person, it is essential to obtain  sufficient  light  produced  by  Knowledge  of  Discerning  on  Corporeallity.  He  must discern four great elements existing in any person who is sitting any place at which his light of wisdom touches, if there is no person closely in front of himself. He must not discern hypothetically without seeing any person with the help of light of wisdom. If he develops concentration continuously through discerning four great elements existing in nearest person, he can see corporeal units soon. 

**PAGE-579** 

Unless  corporeal  units  are  seen  easily,  he  has  to  continue  to  discern  four  great elements  only.  He  will  see  white  block  of  external  person’s  body  and  then  he  will  see transparent block gradually. He must discern that transparent block in order to see space element continuously. Finally corporeal units existing in external person can be seen clearly. 

There are  same numbers of corporeal units and corporeal ***dhammas***, i.e., (6) kinds and (54) kinds respectively, in internal eye-door and external eye-door. The practicing person must  keep  those  corporeal  ***dhammas***  in  mind  alternately  over  and  over.  He  must  keep corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring in remaining (5) doors,(42) bodily parts in mind in similar way. 

When those (54) kinds, (44) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring in each door, each bodily part of both internal and external persons can be kept in mind alternately, over and over he must keep all kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind as “corporeal ***dhamma***, corporeal ***dhamma***”, as a whole. Afterwards, non-real corporealities occurring in external persons must also be kept in mind. There are corporeal units which consist of pure real corporealities in ***cittajarūpa, utujarūpa, āhārajarūpa***. There are also corporeal units which consist of both real and non-real corporealities mixed together. Furthermore, there are four kinds of characteristic corporealities (***lakkhaņarūpa***), which are inclusive in (10) kinds of non-real  corporealities,  which  are  not  produced  by  any  factor  (=  ***nakutoci  samuţţhāna***). Those all kinds of real and non-real corporealities occurring in both internal and external persons must be kept in mind as “corporeal ***dhamma***, corporeal ***dhamma***” alternately over and over as a whole. 

The righteous ***meditator*** must keep all kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** existing in living beings within (31) realms in mind as a whole through extending insight knowledge gradually. If the virtuous person is able to discern up to infinite universes, he must keep corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind as a whole. He has to practice continuously in order to see only piles of corporeal ***dhammas*** but not persons, beings, human beings, heavenly beings, *brahma*s. 

**(V) 77.  *bhāvarūpa* (sex-corporeality)** 

If the righteous person is gentleman, he can discern only virility, male sex corporeality called ***pumbhāvarūpa***  in  him.  If  the  righteous person  is  lady,  she  can  discern  only  femininity, female sex corporeality called ***itthibhāvarūpa***. 

**PAGE-580** 

However  \_\_\_\_  during  discerning  external  living  beings,  both  kinds  of  sex- corporealities, virility and femininity can be discerned as a whole. In the aspect of disciple’s knowledge, it is explained in the subcommentary, ***Anupada Sutta ţīkā***, that……. 

***Pāli Quotation*** (***M-ţī-3-274, 275***) 

- Due to presence of the Noble preaching that “only when all kinds of corporeality-

mentality are known by three kinds of full understanding (***pariññā***) can any person liberate from suffering of defilements, suffering of rounds of rebirth, preached by the Exalted One,  

1. both all corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** called conditioned things which are existing in internal continuum of oneself and  
1. all corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** called conditioned things which are existing in external  continuum  of  others  must  be  discerned  as  objects  of  ***vipassanā***  practice without discriminating as man, woman, person, being, through discerning as a whole because those are the same phenomena as external ones, 

This is the field of objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge (***sammasanacāra khetta***) of disciples. (***M-ţī-3- 274, 275***) 

Therefore these various beings, i.e., 

1. those beings with pure corporeality (mindless being), 
1. those beings with both kinds of corporeality-mentality (five-groups-existences) within  (31)  realms  must be  kept in  mind  as  a  whole, due to same occurrence  as 

external phenomena. In this stage, the righteous ***meditator*** must practice in order to see only piles  of  corporeal  ***dhammas***  without  seeing  man,  woman,  person,  being,  human,  *devas, brahma* within (31) realms. 

However in that ***Anupada*** ***Sutta ţīkā***, it is explained as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (M-ţī-3-275)*** 

- The  Most  Venerable  ***Moggallāna  Mahā  Thero***,  actually,  performed  ***vipassanā*** 

practice through extracting some kinds of conditioned things specifically after discriminating on  man,  woman,  person,  being  etc.  He  performed  ***vipassanā***  discerning  through  mere touching  with  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  towards  those  conditioned  things.  The  commentary, therefore, explained that “as walking by touching of tip of walking stick on to the ground, only partial conditioned things can be discerned as objects ***vipassanā*** knowledge. (***M-ţī-3- 275***) 

**PAGE-581** 

It means during walking with a stick, as the soil which is untouched by the tip of walking stick is larger than the soil which is touched by walking stick, although the Most Venerable  ***Moggallāna***  performed  ***vipassanā***  discerning  through  extracting  conditioned things occurring in  external beings, those conditioned things which are not discerned by ***vipassanā*** knowledge are more than conditioned things which are discerned by ***vipassanā*** knowledge. He can discern all qualitative numbers conditioned things but not quantitative numbers completely. It should be understood in this way. 

Through following example of way of discerning of wise persons, such as Venerable ***Moggallāna***  etc.,  during  discerning  on  external  corporeal  ***dhammas***  one  can  discern corporeal ***dhammas*** existing in some external beings specifically. Because (32) bodily parts of external persons can be discerned, ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** consisting in those  (32)  bodily  parts  can  be  discerned  and  kept  in  mind  systematically.  It  should  be considered explanation found in above ***Mahāţīkā*** **(1.435)**. (See page 577 this volume.) 

**(V) 78. Towards external mental phenomena** 

Because the Most Venerable ***Moggallāna*** was mastery in concern with super-psychic knowledge, he could extract and discern mental ***dhammas*** occurring some external beings. If the virtuous person also has got ***paracittavijānana abhiññāņa*** (= super-psychic knowledge of knowing on other’s mind), he can extract and discern mental ***dhammas*** occurring in some external  beings  specifically.  The  ability  to  know  other’s  mind  concerns  with ***paracittaabhiññāņa*** only. 

The  virtuous  one  who  lacks  ***paracittavijānana  abhiññāņa***  must  discern  external mental  ***dhammas***  as  a  whole,  due  to  same  occurrence  as  external  ***dhammas***,  without differentiating man, woman, person, being. 

If the righteous ***meditator*** can keep all kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring in both external living world and external non-living world within (31) realms in mind as a whole, he can change to discern external mental ***dhammas***. He has to discern factors of absorption and associating ***dhammas*** of absorption of external persons as beginning. If it is successful, he has to discern those absorption mental ***dhammas*** of both internal and external continuums alternately, over and over. 

When he has got satisfaction to keep absorption mental ***dhammas*** in mind, he can begin  to  keep  mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking  objects  of  corporeal  ***dhammas***. Because he began to keep mental ***dhammas*** of mind-door-cognitive process in mind, during discerning on internal mental ***dhammas***, he must begin to keep mental ***dhammas*** of mind- door-cognitive process which arise by taking objects of corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind, during discerning on external mental ***dhammas*** in similar way. 

**PAGE-582** 

As way of keeping wholesome group mental ***dhammas*** of wholesome impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process of internal continuum of oneself, in mind, external continuums of others must also be kept in mind in similar way. It is changing ways of practices from easy way to difficult ones gradually. It will be presented an example. 

As one keeps mental ***dhammas*** of internal continuum of oneself in mind  

1. through keeping life-continuum mind-clear-element in mind and then \_\_\_\_ 
1. after  taking  object  of  eye-transparent-element,  mental  ***dhammas***  of  mind-door- cognitive processes which know that eye-transparent-element, 
1) as the eye-transparent-element, 
1) as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1) as ***anicca***, 
1) as ***dukkha***, 
1) as ***anatta***, 
1) as ***asubha***, 

are kept in mind, similarly \_\_\_ he must keep external mental ***dhammas*** of others in mind as a whole, due to the same occurrence of external phenomena, 

1. through keeping external life-continuum mind-clear-element in mind and then 
1. after  taking  object  of  external  eye-transparent-elements\_\_\_\_  mental  ***dhammas***  of mind-door-cognitive processes which know that eye-transparent-element, 
1) as the eye-transparent-element, 
1) as corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1) as ***anicca***, 
1) as ***dukkha***, 
5) as ***anatta***, 
5) as ***asubha***, 

must be kept in mind. 

One  must  not  differentiate  whose  life-continuum  mind-clear-element,  whose  eye- transparent-element,  whose  mental ***dhammas***  of  mind-door-cognitive process  etc., but  he must  discern  as  a  whole  generally,  due  to  the  same  occurrence  of  external  phenomena. During keeping unwholesome mental ***dhammas*** of unwholesome impulsions of mind-door- cognitive processes which arise by taking object of the eye-transparent-element, in mind, he must discern external continuums of others by following examples of internal continuum of himself. It should be understood similarly on ways of discerning on mental ***dhammas*** which are  inclusive  in  ***dhamma***-object  line,  which  arise  by  taking  objects  of  real  and  non-real corporealities. 

During keeping mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking visible-object as object in mind, as one performs to discern internal continuum of oneself, external continuums of others must also be performed through  

1. keeping both eye-door and mind-door in mind simultaneously and then 
1. external visible-object must taken as object and mental ***dhammas*** occurring in eye- door-cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive processes must be kept in mind. 

**PAGE-583** 

One must not differentiate external continuums of persons, beings as whose eye-door, whose mind-door, whose visible-object etc. One must keep in mind as a whole, due to the same occurrence of external phenomena. Mental ***dhammas*** of remaining ear-door-cognitive process, mind-door-cognitive processes etc., which arise by taking audible-object etc., must be kept in mind by following ways of discerning on internal phenomena. If wise-attention is available, there will be wholesome impulsions, while if unwise-attention is available, there will  be  unwholesome  impulsions.  Internal  phenomena  and  external  phenomena  must  be discerned and kept in mind alternately over and over. 

**From near to farther *dhammas*** 

During discerning on external corporeality-mentality, previously one must begin to discern those phenomena occurring in near place. Then he must extend his insight knowledge towards farther place and he has to keep corporeality-mentality in mind as a whole. He must sharpen insight knowledge through alternate discerning on internal phenomena and external phenomena over and over. Finally he has to go on in order to reach the stage in which all kinds of corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** within (31) realms can be kept in mind as a whole. When  he  has  got  success  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_  as  he  performs  these  four  functions  in  the  aspect  of internal phenomena, i.e.,  

1. keeping pure corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind, 
1. keeping pure mental ***dhammas*** in mind, 
1. keeping corporeality-mentality in mind, 
1. distinguishing and making mental notes on corporeality-mentality, similarly, he must perform those four functions in the aspect of external phenomena in similar way. 

Afterwards within one sitting period of practice the righteous ***meditator*** must perform alternate discerning on internal and external phenomena over and over through four kinds of functions, i.e., 

1. keeping pure corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind, 
1. keeping pure mental ***dhammas*** in mind, 
1. keeping corporeality-mentality in mind, 
1. distinguishing and making mental notes on corporeality-mentality, 

**PAGE -584** 

If one can accomplish to practice in that way, according to explanation, 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Vs-2-228)***, 

One can determine that “there is neither being nor person; there is neither *deva* nor *brahma*; other than corporeal ***dhammas*** and mental ***dhammas*** only”. 

(Notes: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ In the realm of mindless beings there is pure corporeal ***dhamma***; in the four immaterial spheres, there are pure mental ***dhammas***; in the (26) realms of five- group-existence, there are both kinds of corporeal and mental ***dhammas***. All kinds of those phenomena occurring in (31) realms must be kept in mind as a whole. 

**(V) 79. *nāmarūpavavatthānañāņa*** 

The  practicing  person  who  has  reached  into  other  bank  of  these  three  kinds  of ***pariggaha*** (=keeping in mind), viz., 

1. keeping pure corporeality in mind (***rūpa pariggaha***),  
1. keeping pure mentality in mind (***arūpapariggaha),*** 
1. keeping corporeality-mentality in mind (***rūparūpa pariggaha***) 

who is performing ***vipassanā*** practice, must continue to function of ***nāmarūpavavatthana*** ( = distinguishing and making mental notes on mentality-corporeality). It is already presented in above sections. The commentary called ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** also explains so as to continue to perform that function as follows: \_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-228) (Mahāţī-2-362)*** 

1. In  order  to  abandon  both  obsession  on  self,  obsession  on  being  through worldly usage (***lokasamaññā attadţţthi, sattadţţthi***), and wrong adherence due to wrong view on self (***micchābhinivesa***) which is improper way of taking into heart in the continuum of mind of heretices in a way that “there is life- body, butterfly-body, soul-body, being, self-body really”, after distinguishing and  making  mental  notes  on  mentality-corporeality  through  specific characteristic; 

**PAGE-585** 

2. In order to overcome ***sattasammoha*** (= delusion due to wrong knowing as being); which is the nature of wrong knowing as “there is man, *deva, brahma*, person, being, living being, self really”; which arises by means of obsession on single mass of shape and form through lacking proper way of taking into heart  on  ultimate  nature  of  corporeality  and  mentality,  which  is  worth performing previous to ***vipassanā*** practice, resulting from due to inability to determine that “there is only mind-matter and due to inability to break down compactness of corporeality and mentality called compactness of continuity (***santatighana***),  compactness  of  form  (***samūhaghana***),  compactness  of function (***kiccaghana***), compactness of object (***ārammaņaghana***), 
3. In order to put the mind in the realm of non-delusion (***asammohabhūmi***), which is opposite of delusion (= strong bewilderment), which is capable of abandoning on those ***sammohadhammas***, 

The  practicing  person  called  ***vipassanākammika  puggala***  distinguishes  and  makes mental notes in a way that \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

“all phenomena occurring within these three realms are mind and matter only; there is neither being nor person; there is neither ***jīva*** (living being) nor ***atta*** (self-identity)”, in the next kind\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

“There is no person, ***being, jīva***, ***atta***, but corporeality-mentality only”, 

after considering on these kinds of meaning through numerous ***Sutta***s. (***Vs-2-228***) 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-1-137) (M-1-248) (Sam-1-137)*** 

**(V) 80. *yaţhābhūtadassanā ñāņa*** 

As a simile that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

If some structures, axis, wheel, hub of cart-wheel, spoke of a cartwheel etc., are set up as a form and shape which is factor of designation as coach, it is called coach in worldly usage; if each part of coach is scrutinized by eye of wisdom on ultimate nature, there is no coach, (= as group of corporealities with nutriment as eighth factor, which are produced by temperature), similarly\_\_\_\_\_ 

If five kinds of clinging aggregates are present apparently, designation of worldly usage as being arises consequently. (It means in the aspect of ultimate reality, there is no being but five kinds of clinging aggregates only.) 

As a simile that \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

If some structures of a house, i.e., wood, creeper, clay used as plaster, roofing grass etc., are set up as form and shape which is factor of designation as house through surrounding with space, the worldly usage of house arises consequently \_\_\_\_\_ 

In the aspect of ultimate sense, there is no house, (= as group of corporealities with nutriment as eighth factor, which are produced by temperature), similarly\_\_\_\_\_ 

Depending on bone, organs in the shape of line of streak, flesh, skin, the worldly usage on the space which is surrounded by bone, organs in the shape of line of streak etc., as body (***sarīra***) arises consequently. Designation as corporeal ***dhamma*** arises consequently. 

**PAGE-586** 

It means that as it is reached into the worldly usage, house, monastery etc., after abandoning original designations, wood etc., if wood etc., are lying in a condition which can be designated as house, monastery, \_\_\_ similarly \_\_\_\_it will be reached into designation as ***rūpa*** (corporeal ***dhamma***), ***sarīra*** (body), after abandoning original designations, wood etc., if bone, organs in the shape of line of streak etc., are existing in a condition which can be designated as corporeality, body. According to explanation found in ***Mahāţīkā***, that \_\_\_\_ 

***rūpam sarīramicceva sankham gacehatiti yojanā. (Mahāţī-2-362),*** 

In  this  case,  the  term,  ***sarīra***  (body)  means  ***rūpa***  (corporeality)  only.  In  the  next method, it means five kinds of clinging aggregates. 

As these smiles that \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

If forefinger, thumb etc., are lying in such condition which can be said as fist, the worldly usage, fist, arises consequently, \_\_\_\_ 

If body of harp, harp strings etc., are lying in such condition which can be said as harp, the worldly usage, harp, arises consequently, \_\_\_\_\_ 

If elephants, horses etc., are gathering in such condition which can be said as military, the worldly usage, military, arises consequently, \_\_\_\_\_ 

If city wall, houses, gate, tarret of a palace wall, etc., are lying in such condition which can be said city, the worldly usage, city, arises consequently,\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

If stem, foliage etc., are lying in such condition which can be said as tree, the worldly usage, tree, arises consequently; in the aspect of ultimate sense, if each part, stem, branch etc.,  is  considered  with  the  help  of  insight  knowledge,  there  is  no  tree,  (=  as  group  of corporeallities  with  nutriment  as  eight  factor,  which  are  produced  by temperature)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

Similarly \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ if five kinds of clinging aggregates (= corporeality-mentality) arise unitedly  by  means  of  continuity  of  preceding  and  succeeding  phenomena  which  are connecting each other incessantly, in the aspect of conventional reality, the worldly usage, person, being (***jīva***, ***atta***), arise consequently. In the aspect of ultimate reality \_\_\_\_ if each ***dhamma*** is scrutinized by penetrative insight knowledge, there is no being which is the base of wrong opinion that “I am, or I”, but mind-matter only. 

Thus  knowing  as  it  really  is  arises  in  the  insight  of  practicing  person  called ***vipassanākammika***. 

***evam passato hi dassanam yathābhūtadassanam nāma hoti. (Vs-2-229)*** 

- The wisdom gained by knowing and seeing on the phenomena that “there is no 

person,  being,  ***jīva***  (=  living  being),  ***atta***  (=  self-identity),  but  corporeality-mentality”  is knowledge  on  phenomena  as  they  really  are  (***yaţhābhūta  dassana***).  This  knowledge  on phenomena as they really are, can be designated as Purification of View (***dţţthivisuddhi***), due to lack of impurity called wrong obsession as person, being, ***jīva***, ***atta***. (***Vs-2-228, 229***) 

However the righteous ***meditator*** should not satisfy so far as this extent, he has to keep  corporeality-mentality  in  mind  continuously  through  characteristic-function manifestation-proximate cause. It will be presented in ***Lakkhaņādi Catukka***, Volume IV. 

**PAGE-587** 

In  this  paper  called  ***nibbānagāmini  paţipadā***,  section  of  ***lakkhaņādi  catukka***  is presented  after  section  of  Knowledge  of  Discerning  Cause  and  Condition  ( ***paccayapariggahañāņa***).  It  is  because  of  the  fact  that  \_\_\_\_\_  only  when  Knowledge  of Discerning Cause and Condition is attained ways of discerning on characteristic-function- manifestation-proximate cause of ultimate nature of some corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** can be understood easily. For instance \_\_\_\_\_ Way of discerning on characteristic-function- manifestation-proximate cause of formation aggregate is a way of practice which can be accomplished after attainment of Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition which is capable of keeping causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of successive past periods and successive future periods such as how present resultant ***dhammas*** arise due to past causal ***dhammas***; how future resultant ***dhammas*** arise, due to present causal ***dhammas*** etc, in mind. Due to presence  of  this  reason,  Section  on  ***lakkhaņādicatukka***  is  presented  after  Knowledge  of Discerning Cause and Condition (= Section of Dependent-Origination) in order to understand ways of discerning profoundly.  

In accordance with instruction found in olden day commentaries, mind-matter must be kept in mind by means of characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate cause in this stage of this Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality also. After attaining Knowledge of Discerning  Cause  and  Condition  mind-matter  must  be  kept  in  mind  again  by  means  of characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate  cause.  Afterwards,  corporeality-mentality- cause-result (= conditioned things) are kept in mind again and then the practicing person must change ***vipassanā*** discerning. If one follows instructions in that way, the insight knowledge relating to corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** will be clearer and clearer. 

**(V) 81 *anubodha ñāņa* *Pāli Quotation (Di-ţī-2-89, 90)*** 

In  accordance  with  explanation,  “***anu  anu  bujjhanaţţhena  anubodho***,”  these  two kinds  of  knowledge,  Knowledge  of  Analyzing  Mentality-Corporeality  and  Knowledge  of Discerning Cause and Condition can not arise through once taking into heart previously. Because essential function can be accomplished through repeated discerning on objects of conditioned things called those corporeality-mentality-cause-result over and over again, it is called ***anubodha ñāņa***. For an instance \_\_\_\_\_\_ even until now, the righteous ***meditator*** is unable  to  discern  and  keep  in  mind  mental  ***dhammas***  occurring  in  life-continuum systematically. Therefore if a person discerns these phenomena over and over, his insight knowledge relating to corporeality-mentality will become clearer and clearer. 

If  one  compares  these  two  kinds  of  knowledge,  i.e.,  Knowledge  of  Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality which gained before and after discerning on corporeality-mentality through characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate cause, it will be found that the latter is clearer than the former in most ***meditators***. 

**PAGE-588** 

Therefore,  if  any  one  suggests  that  ways  of  discerning  on  corporeality-mentality through  characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate  cause  is  not  important  extra- function,  he  will  failure  to  attain  best  opportunity  which  is  available  under  this  Noble Admonishment only. Availability to discern the ultimate ***dhammas*** in four aspects with the help  of  penetrative  knowledge  is,  indeed,  out  and  out  opportunity  under  the  noble Admonishment  of  the  Supreme  Buddha.  Superficial  consideration  in  such  way  that  “all ultimate ***dhammas*** are inclusive in those phenomena which are discerned by overselves” is deserving to avoid especially in the way of practice leading to ***nibbāna***. 

**(V)82. It should not be considered wrongly** 

In  this  stage  of  keeping  internal  and  external  corporeality-mentality  in  mind  one should be careful so as not to consider wrongly on the meaning of explanation relating to ***cittānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna***, found in commentary as follows: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-285)*** 

- Through  distinguishing  and  keeping  in  mind  (16)  kinds  of  consciousness, 

***sarāgacitta***  (=  consciousness  which  arises  together  with  lust)  etc.,  of  both  internal  and external persons, which has been preached in section on ***cittānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna***, such and such consciousness arise at such and such moments; through well making mental note on that  and  that  consciousness  at  that  and  that  moment,  one  must  discern  on  both  one’s consciousness and other’s consciousness; sometimes on one’s consciousness; sometimes on other’s consciousness; as consciousness alternately, over and over again. (***M-A-1-285***) 

With regarding to instruction found in above commentary, there are some teachers who agree and accept the opinion that whatever kind of concept or ultimate ***dhamma*** must be discerned randomly as he likes, without analyzing on object. It has been explained previously on the fact this ***cittānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna*** is a kinds of preaching which instructs to discern and  keep  mental  ***dhammas***,  in  other  words,  mind-matter  in  mind  through  discerning  on consciousness as priority. 

In above explanation of commentary, it is instructed that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. in such and such moments, such and such consciousness arise,  
1. that and that consciousness must be distinguished and kept in mind well and then \_\_\_ 
1. (a) both one’s consciousness 
2) and other’s consciousness 
2) sometimes  one’s  consciousness  or  sometimes  other’s  consciousness,  must  be discerned and kept in mind over and over again. 

It  must  be  careful  the  fact  there  are  two  kinds  of  consciousness,  i.e.,  discerned consciousness (= object) and discerning consciousness (knowledge) in this instruction. 

1. With  regarding  to  these  words,  “in  such  and  such  moments,  such  and  such consciousness arise, that and that consciousness must be”, it directs (16) kinds of consciousness, ***sarāga*** ***citta*** etc., which are discerned objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge. 
1. With  regarding  to  these  words,  “distinguished  and  kept  in  mind  well,”  it  directs ***vipassanā*** consciousness which is capable of discerning (= Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality called ***nāmarūpa paricchedañāņa***). 

In this explanation, discerned consciousness are (16) kinds of consciousness, ***sarāgacitta*** etc., which have been preached in ***cittānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna***, while discerning consciousness are continuity of great wholesome impulsions of mind-door-cognitive processes which are predominated with ***vipassanā*** knowledge, Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality, which arise in the continuum of mind of worldly person and fulfilling person. The latter are inclusive in ***vītaraga citta***, ***vītadosacitta,vītamohacitta*** etc. Those discerned consciousness, ***sarāga*** ***citta*** etc., and discerning consciousness  are unable to arise simultaneously within either  same  mind  moment  or  same  cognitive  process,  but  separately  each  other.  While discerned consciousness are arising through three-time-phases called ***uppāda-ţhiti-bhanga***, discerning  (wholesome)  consciousness  does  not  arise  yet.  While  discerning  (wholesome) consciousness  is  arising  through  three-time-phases  called  ***uppāda***-***ţhiti***-***bhanga***,  discerned consciousness also does not arise yet. 

If it is so, there will be reasonable question that what do those words of commentary “ in such and such moments, such and such consciousness arises; that and that consciousness must be distinguished and kept in mind well,” mean? The answer is as follows: \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

It  means  during  discerning  on  mental  ***dhammas***,  ***sarāgacitta***  etc.,  the  practicing person  must  discern  those  mental ***dhammas***  in order  to  see  momentary present  of  those ***dhammas***; in order to reach momentary present called ***uppāda***-***ţhiti***-***bhanga*** with the help of penetrative insight after distinguishing and making mental note on consciousness and mental concomitants which are associating ***dhammas*** with the various  consciousness. (It has been explained in detail in section of ***Bhaddekaratta*** ***Sutta***. Ways of discerning are also presented in this volume.) 

Furthermore \_\_\_\_\_ this ***cittānupassanasatipaţţhāna*** and above commentary do not instruct in order to discern mental ***dhammas*** without separating between concept and ultimate nature. For  instance  \_\_\_\_  absorption  consciousness  are  called  lofty  consciousness  which  are inclusive  in  those  (16)  kinds  of  discerned  objects.  Those  absorption  consciousness  are included in list of object ***dhammas*** which must be discerned by ***vipassanā*** knowledge of virtuous persons who have got vehicle of ***samatha***. Those absorption ***dhammas*** can not arise through continuous discerning on concept and ultimate nature without separating each other. Those ***dhammas*** are available, even if a meditation subject, which can bring forth absorption, is  practiced  systematically.  This  fact  must  be  considered  especially  for  every  ***meditator***, himself. 

**PAGE-590** 

Then  some  noble  teachers  suggested  that  during  keeping  these  (16)  kinds  of consciousness in mind, those consciousness must not need to discern one by one specifically but it must be discerned only when each kind arises automatically. All ultimate ***dhammas***, except ***nibbāna***, can arise in the presence of factors of respective causal ***dhammas*** unitedly. There is no ultimate ***dhamma*** which arises automatically. (It will be explicit in Section of Dependent-Origination.) 

Furthermore  \_\_\_\_\_  some  virtuous  persons  have  no  desire  to  discern  some unwholesome consciousness, ***sarāgacitta*** etc., specifically. They thought that way of practice can bring forth unwholesome ***dhammas***. 

Because the Exalted One instructed that “***anuppannāņam akusalānam*** ***dhammānam anuppādāya chandam janeti….. (M-1-89)*** 

- one must endeavour so as not to arise unwholesome ***dhammas*** which have not 

arisen yet, “ in the section of ***sammappadhāna***, the way of practice by which one discerns unwholesome ***dhammas*** through making intentionally (= through making unwise-attention) can  bring  forth  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  which  have  not  arisen  yet,  suggested  by  those virtuous ones.  

When  one  asks  those  persons  with  this  opinion  that  “when  do  you  discern unwholesome ***dhammas***, ***sarāgacitta*** etc.,? “ they usually answer that the Supreme Buddha instructed  it  must  be  discerned  only  when  they  arise  through  coincidence  of  object  and attention ***(manasīkāra)***. 

In  this  case,  the  righteous  ***meditator***  should  like  to  consider  carefully.  Unwise attention  called  ***ayanisomanasīkāra***  is  proximate  cause  of  all  kinds  of  unwholesome ***dhammas***. It is improper way of taking into heart objects as ***nicca***, ***sukha***, ***atta***, ***subha*** when various objects impinge on respective doors. If that unwise attention arises, unwholesome ***dhammas*** will arise consequently. Who does it to arise that unwise attention? Consider that how can that unwise attention reach to yourself, whether horse-cart riding or by bus? 

If unwholesome ***dhammas***, ***sarāga*** ***citta*** etc., arises in continuum of mind of righteous person, it will be arisen through his unwise attention. That unwise attention is produced by himself only. Please consider that “is there any other person who make that unwise-attention? Or does it arise automatically? 

**PAGE-591** 

If one can agree with the opinion that those unwholesome ***dhammas*** arise in one’s continuity of mentality through one’s unwise attention; if one can agree with the opinion that those arising unwholesome ***dhammas*** must also be discerned in order to know through three kinds of full understanding, one should like to consider the fact why one can not agree to discern  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  which  arise  through  unwise  attention  in  this  section  of ***nāmakammaţţhāna***.   

Furthermore some complain that every one has  to endeavour in order to improve wholesome ***dhammas*** but not unwholesome ones. 

The  way  of  practice  by  which  five  clinging  aggregates,  including  unwholesome ***dhammas***, ***sarāgacitta*** etc., must be discerned in order to know through three kinds of full understanding,  is  mundane  practice  of  mindfulness  foundation  which  must  be  fulfilled previous to the Noble Path (= ***pubbabhāga*** ***satipaţţhānāmagga***). It is developing mundane ***maggasacca*** ***dhammas***. 

It is endeavouring, really,  

1. so as not to arise unwholesome ***dhammas*** which have not arisen yet; 
1. so as to abandon unwholesome ***dhammas*** which had been arisen; 
1. so as to arise wholesome ***dhammas*** which have not arisen yet; 
1. so as to improve wholesome ***dhammas*** which have arisen. 

It is endeavouring in order to attain  

1. Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality which can distinguish unwholesome ***dhammas***; 
1. Knowledge  of  Discerning  Cause  and  Condition  which  can  distinguish  and  keep unwholesome ***dhammas*** in mind; 
1. ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  which  knows  penetratively  on  nature  of ***anicca***,***dukkha***,***anatta***, ***asubha*** of those unwholesome ***dhammas*** together with their causal ***dhammas***, 

But it is not endeavouring so as to proliferate unwholesome ***dhammas***. 

Furthermore, it is not endeavouring so as to arise unwholesome ***dhammas*** which have not  arisen  yet.  Beings  obsess  not  only  wholesome  ***dhammas***  but  also  unwholesome ***dhammas***. 

They usually obsess unwholesome ***dhammas*** in a way that \_\_\_\_\_ 

“my greed is not the same as other’s,” 

“my anger is not the same as other’s,” 

“my conceit is not the same as other’s,” 

“my mind is not the same as other’s,” etc. Then they usually obsess wrong view, such as ***attavāda*** (= wrong view on self). 

Those unwholesome ***dhammas*** must, therefore, be discerned ***vipassanā*** knowledge, knowledge  of  contemplation  of  impermanence  etc.,  over  and  over  again  in  order  to breakdown  obsessions  of  selfish  desire-conceit-wrong  view  on  those  unwholesome ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-592** 

There  is  farther  consideration  again  on  the  fact  “one  should  not  take  into  heart intentionally  in  order  to  arise  unwholesome  ***dhammas***;  one  must  discern  unwholesome ***dhammas***  which  arise  through  coincidence  of  object  and  attention  only.”  Wise  attention arises  frequently  in  the  continuum  of  mind  of  person  who  always  performs  ***vipassanā*** discerning  throughout  all  the  day  and  night.  If  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  arises  continuously throughout  one  or  two  hours,  it  will  be  opportunity  to  arise  unwholesome  ***dhammas***, ***sarāgacitta*** etc. Only when unwise attention arise at interval of ***vipassanā*** practices, those unwholesome ***dhammas*** can arise. 

If unwholesome ***dhammas***, ***sarāgacitta***, etc., arise at interval of ***vipassanā*** practices, it is very difficult to discern those ***dhammas*** in order to reach ultimate nature through breaking down  the  compactness.  Furthermore  \_\_\_\_\_  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  discern  through characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate  cause  because  of  lack  of  ***vipassanā*** knowledge or knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality at that interval of ***vipassanā*** practices.  Because  those  ***dhammas***  are  only  specific  ***dhammas***  which  can  be  known  by ***vipassanā*** knowledge, including Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality, it will be meaningless  of  way  of  discerning  by  which  ordinary  consciousness  without  ***vipassanā*** knowledge discerns on  those ***dhammas***. The righteous ***meditator***, himself, should like to scrutinize the fact whether or not those unwholesome ***dhammas*** can be discerned by ordinary consciousness  without  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  in  order  to  see  characteristic-function- manifestation-proximate cause of those ***dhammas***. 

Furthermore  \_\_\_\_  as  in  the  continuum  of  mind  of  Venerable  ***Mahānāga  Mahā Thero***,  if  defilements  can  be  discarded  throughout  (60)  years  by  means  of  absorption attainment or efficiency of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, resulting in impossibility to arise those defilements  through  three-time-phases  called  ***uppāda***-***ţhiti***-***bhanga***,  does  the  righteous ***meditator*** omit to discern those defilements? This fact is also essential to be considered. 

Again \_\_\_\_\_ the craving ***(taņhā)*** is significant factor in ***samudayasacca*** ***dhammas***. The craving which is origin of present life five aggregates had arisen at past life, when ***kamma***  (=action)  which  will bring  forth present  life  five  aggregates  called ***dukkhasacca*** ***dhammas***, was cultivated. Then the craving which is cultivated in present life is only origin of  future  five  aggregates.  That ***samudaya*** ***sacca***  ***dhamma***  also  is  inclusive  in  the  list  of objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge. It includes in the Section of Dependent-Origination. 

The righteous ***meditator*** has to discern causal relationship, i.e., how contact arises, due to sense-bases; how feeling arises, due to contact; how the craving arises, due to feeling etc., with the help of penetrative ***vipassanā*** knowledge. 

**PAGE-593** 

During discerning in that way, due to presence of wise attention of practicing person, unless  craving  arises  through  feeling,  it  must  be  considered  that  “must  he  wait  to  arise craving?” 

The  practicing  person  has  to  endeavour  so  as  to  be  ready  to  discern  whatever ***dhamma***,  which  is  really  object  of  ***vipassanā***  knowledge,  which  can  be  discerned  by ***meditators*** insight really. Every practicing person should like to practice in order to be able to discern acquired absorption at every time, at every place. He has to practice in order to be able to discern whatever defilement which has not eradicated yet by the Noble Path. 

He should like to read instructions found in ***cittānupassanā*** ***satipaţţhāna*** ***(M-1-76)*** and commentary ***(M-A-1-285)*** again. It instructed that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

The practicing person has to discern 

1. internal (16) kinds of consciousness, ***sarāgacitta*** etc., sometimes, 
1. external (16) kinds of consciousness, ***sarāgacitta*** etc., sometimes, 
1. internal-external (16) kinds of consciousness, ***sarāgacitta*** etc., sometimes, over and over. 

Those are preachings which instruct the way of practice that after keeping mentality- corporeality in mind through discerning on consciousness as priority, causal ***dhammas*** must be scrutinized and then those mentality-corporeality together with causal ***dhammas*** must be discerned  as  ***anicca***,  ***dukkha***,  ***anatta***,  ***asubha***.  It  should,  therefore,  be  recognized confidentially that those preachings do not instruct to discern concept and ultimate ***dhamma*** without separating. 

**(V) 83 Second stages of all four kinds of *satipaţţhāna* are successful** 

Now second stages of all four kinds of ***satipaţţhāna***, i.e., 

1) keeping internal ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** in mind; 
1) keeping external ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** in mind; 
3) keeping internal-external ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** in mind; are successful.  It is cascade of ways of keeping internal-external corporeality-mentality in mind through making  concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  as  fundamental  of  ***vipassanā*** practice. 

Now the righteous ***meditator*** should like to understand the fact through practicing ***ānāpānakammaţţhāna*** systematically step by step, function of keeping ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***- ***dhamma*** which are objects of foundation of mindfulness and ***vipassanā*** knowledge, in mind is also inclusive simultaneously. 

**PAGE-594 (V) 84 Third stage of practice of *satipaţţhāna* *Pāli Quotation (M-1-71) (M-1-75) (M-1-76) (M-1-77, 78)*** 

1. He abides and discerns steadfastly on the nature of origin of arising and the nature of arising of bodily constituents (in next method, both bodily and mentally constituents); he abides and discerns steadfastly on the nature of origin of dissolution (=cessation) and the nature of dissolution (= cessation) of bodily constituents (in the next method, both  bodily  and  mentally  constituents);  he  abides  and  discerns  steadfastly  on  the nature of origin of arising and nature of arising; the nature of origin of cessation and nature  of  cessation  of  bodily  constituents  (in  the  next  method,  both  bodily  and mentally constituents.) ***(M-1-71)*** 
1. He abides and discerns steadfastly in the nature of origin of arising and the nature of arising  of  feeling;  he  abides  and  discerns  steadfastly  on  the  nature  of  origin  of cessation and the nature of cessation of feeling; he abides and discerns steadfastly on the nature of origin of arising and nature of arising; the nature of origin of cessation and the nature of cessation of feeling. ***(M-1-75)*** 
1. He abides and discerns steadfastly in the nature of origin of arising and the nature of arising of consciousness; he abides and discerns steadfastly on the nature of origin of cessation  and  the  nature  of  cessation  of  consciousness;  he  abides  and  discerns steadfastly on the nature of origin of arising and nature of arising; the nature of origin of cessation and the nature of cessation of consciousness. ***(M-1-76)*** 
1. He abides and discerns steadfastly in the nature of origin of arising and the nature of arising of principle of ***dhammas***; he abides and discerns steadfastly on the nature of origin of cessation and the nature of cessation of principle of ***dhammas***; he abides and discerns steadfastly on the nature of origin of arising and nature of arising; the nature of origin of cessation and the nature of cessation of principle of ***dhammas***. ***(M-1-77, 78)*** 

**PAGE-595 (V) 85 Explanations of commentary and sub-commentary *Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-254, 255)*** 

***Samudayadhammānupassī*** \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ As wind is expelled repeatedly basing on these three factors, i.e.,(1) bellows (2) wind-pipe (3) effort which is adaptable to occur wind, similarly 

The in-breath and out-breath are brought forth repeatedly basing on…… 

1) underived corporealities, derived corporealities, which are produced by four origins, ***kamma***-***citta***-***utu-āhāra***, which are called ***kārajakāya***, (with referring to explanation, ***“kārajakāyonāma cattāri mahābhūtāni upādārūpañca***” (***M-A-1-254***) 
1) nose-tip and 
1) consciousness (which can bring forth in-breath, out-breath). 

Those  three  factors  are  origin  of  arising  of  in-breath-out-breath.  The  person  who discerns on those three ***dhammas*** can be said he discerns steadfastly on nature of origin of arising of ***kāya*** (***assāsapassāsakāya*** called in-breath-out-breath). It means he can be said as ***samudayadhammānupassī*** person. 

***vayadhammānupassī*** \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ As wind is not expelled through (1) abandoning bellows or (2) destroying wind-pipe or (3) discarding effort which is adaptable to occur wind, similarly \_\_\_ 

the in-breath and out-breath can not be brought forth through……. 

1) going to ruin of ***kārajakāya*** or 
1) destroying nose tip or 
1) ceasing of the consciousness. 

Due to ceasing of these factors, ***kārajakāya*** etc., cessation of in-breath-out-breath occurs consequently. The person who discerns in this way can be said he discerns steadfastly on nature  of  origin  of  cessation  of  ***assāsapassāsakāya***.  It  means  he  can  be  said  as ***vayadhammanupassī*** person. 

***Samudayavayadhammānupassī***  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  The  person  who  discerns  nature  of  arising sometimes,  nature  of  cessation  (perishing  away)  sometimes,  can  be  said  as ***samudayavayadhammānupassī*** person. ***(M-1-254, 255)*** 

**PAGE-596** 

Above  explanations  are  performed  with  referring  to  corporeal  ***dhammas***,  sound nonads produced by mind called ***assāsapassāsakāya*** only. As mentioned above previously, the practicing person who develops mindfulness of breathing must continue to discern 

1. sound nonads produced by mind called ***assāsapassāsakāya***, 
1. un-derived corporealities, derived corporealities called ***kārajakāya***, 
1. all kinds of mental ***dhammas*** called ***nāmakāya***, after developing concentration up to access concentration or the fourth absorption concentration. The commentary explains origin of arising of ***kārajakāya*** and ***nāmakāya*** previously as follows.\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(M-A-1-254)*** 

If the practicing person who has got the fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing keeps factors of absorption in mind as beginning in order to change stage of Purification of Views, that kind of person is designated as ***jhānakammika*** person. If he keeps corporeal ***dhammas*** of in-breath-out-breath in mind as beginning, that kind of person is designated as ***assāsapassāsakamika***  person.  Both  kinds  of  person  have  the  same  ways  of  keeping corporeality-mentality in mind. In this case it will be presented on ***jhānakammika*** person in order to understand  ***samudayadhammānupassī*** etc. 

When  ***jhānkammika***  person  scrutinizes  how  do  these  factors  of  absorption  arise depending  on  which  ***dhammas***  with  the  help  of  penetrative  insight  he  knows  they  arise depending  on  base-corporeality.  Base  corporeality  means  ***kārajakāya***  indeed.  The  term, ***kārajakāya***, means four great elements and derived corporealities. Factors of absorption are mental  ***dhammas***  while  ***kāraja***ka***kāya***  are  corporeal  ***dhammas.***  After  distinguishing  and making  mental  notes  on  mentality-corporeality  in  this  way,  when  he  scrutinizes  causal ***dhammas***  of  those  mentality-corporeality  he  knows  and  sees  principle  of  dependent- origination with phenomena of relationships, ignorance etc., resulting in overcoming into sceptical  doubts  in  a  way  that  \_\_\_\_  “these  mind-matter  are  only  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas***; there is neither being nor person, other than causes and results;” and then when he endeavours to improve ***vipassanā*** knowledge through generalizing on mind-matter together with their causal ***dhammas*** as ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, he reaches into the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant in sequence. This is the way of practice leading to liberation from rounds of rebirth upto the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant for a practicing ***bhikkhu*** called ***jhānakammika*** person. (***M-A-1-254***) 

In accordance with above commentary \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-597** 

1) If a practicing person discerns both  
   1) phenomena of arising of five clinging aggregates called ***rūpakāya***, ***nāmakāya***, due to presence of causal ***dhammas***, ignorance-craving-clinging-formations-action etc. and 
   1) phenomena of just arising phases of those five clinging aggregates, he can be said as ***samudayadhammānupassī***, the person who discerns nature of origin of arising and nature of arising of conditioned things. 
1) If a practicing person discerns both  
   1) phenomena  of  absolute  ceasing  of  five  clinging  aggregates  when  causal  ***dhammas***, ignorance-craving-clinging-formations-actions  cease  absolutely  through  the  Noble  Path- Knowledge of Arahant and  
   1) phenomena  of  just  perishing  phases  of  five  clinging  aggregates,  he  can  be  said  as ***vayadhammānupassī***,  the  person  who  discerns  nature  of  origin  of  cessation  and  nature cessation of conditioned things. 
1) If a practicing person discerns ***samudaya*** ***dhamma*** sometimes, ***vayadhamma*** sometimes he can be said as ***samudayavayadhammānupassī*** person. 

Furthermore\_\_\_\_  it  is  explained  in  section  on  deportment  (***iriyapātha***)  etc.,  as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ ***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-257) (M-A\_1 283, 284) (M-A-1-285) (M-A-1-291)*** 

Those words found in above commentaries are explicit with referring to (50) kinds of Knowledge of Arising and Passing Away(***udayabbayañāņa***) called (25) kinds of Knowledge of Arising (***udayañāņa***) and (25) kinds of Knowledge of Passing Away (***vayañāņa***) on five aggregates, which are found in ***Paţisambhidā Magga*** (53). Essence of those commentaries is as follows: \_\_\_\_ 

1. If a practicing person discerns both phenomena of arising of resultant ***dhammas***, five clinging  aggregates  called  ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***,  due  to  obvious  arising  of causal ***dhammas***, ignorance-craving-clinging-formations- action etc., and phenomena of just arising phases of resultant five clinging aggregates, he can be said the person who  discerns  steadfastly  on  nature  of  origin  of  arising  and  nature  of  arising (***samadayadhammānapassī***). 
2. ***Pāli Quotation (Mahāţī-2-421)*** 

**PAGE-598** 

If a practicing person discerns both phenomena of absolute cessation of five clinging aggregates called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma*** without reappearing in future, due to absolute cessation  of  causal  ***dhammas***,  ignorance-craving-clinging-formations-action  without reappearing in future through the Path-Knowledge of Arahant and the phenomena of just perishing phases of those five clinging aggregates with the help of penetrative ***vipassanā*** knowledge,  he  can  be  said  the  person  who  discerns  steadfastly  on  nature  of  origin  of cessation and nature of cessation (***vayadhammānupassī***). 

3. If  a  practicing  person  discerns  ***samudaya***-***dhamma***  sometimes;  ***vayadhamma*** sometimes, with the help of penetrative ***vipassanā*** knowledge, he can be said the person who discerns steadfastly on nature of origin of arising and nature of arising; nature  of  origin  of  cessation  and  nature  of  cessation (***samudayavayadhammānupassī***). 

In this section the Exalted One preached on those three kinds of knowledge, i.e.,  

1. Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition, 
1. Knowledge of Comprehension, 
1. Knowledge  of  Arising  and  Passing  Away  on  the  whole.  It  will  be  presented continuously on cascade ways of practices for attainment of those knowledge, step by stet. It will be presented previously on brief account of way of practices which must be  performed  successively  so  as  not  to  lose  sight  way  of  practice  relating  to ***satipaţţhāna*** in accordance with preaching found in ***Mahāsatipaţţhāna*** ***Sutta***. It is for the sake of understanding on practice of foundation of mindfulness which must be fulfilled by oneself. 

**(V)86.  Fourth stage of practice of *satipaţţhāna***  

***Pāli Quotation (M-1-71) (M-1-75, 76) (M-1-76) (M-1-78)* PAGE-599** 

Furthermore, the mindfulness appears towards that practicing ***bhikkhu*** in this way, 

i.e., 

1. There are only corporeal ***dhammas***; 
1. there are only feeling ***dhammas***; 
1. there are only consciousness ***dhammas***; 
1. there are only ***dhamma*** phenomena. That mindfulness is for the sake of advancement of ***vipassanā*** knowledge only; it is only for the sake of improvement of mindfulness which are associating with successive kinds of ***vipassanā*** Knowledge. That ***bhikkhu*** abides  without  depending  on  five  clinging  aggregates  called  ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***- ***dhamma*** through craving-wrong view in a way that “I, mine” etc. He does not obsess any ***dhamma*** in the world called five clinging aggregates, which are designated as ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***, as “I, mine”. 

Thus….. ***bhikkhus***……… the practicing ***bhikkhu*** and discerns steadfastly on 

1. all bodily constituents as corporeal ***dhammas***; 
1. all kinds of feeling as feeling ***dhammas***; 
3. all kinds of consciousness as consciousness ***dhammas***; 
3. all kinds of ***dhamma*** phenomena as ***dhamma***a phenomena. ***(M-1-71, 75, 76, 78)*** 

In this section, the Exalted One preached on various ***vipassanā*** knowledge, from Knowledge of Dissolution (***bhangañāņa***) until the Noble Path-Knowledge on the whole. 

Now it has been finished to present brief account of practice of four mindfulness foundation. It will be presented on ways of discerning on phenomena of arising of resultant ***dhammas***, five clinging aggregates called ***kāya***-***vedanā***-***citta***-***dhamma***, due to presence of causal ***dhammas***, ignorance-craving-clinging-formations-action, which are called section of Dependent-Origination, in coming volume. 

Volume II ***nāmakammaţţhāna*** finished. 

Pa-Auk-Tawya Sayadaw ***Citta***la Mountain Monastery Pa-Auk Tawya 

Translated by  A***ññā***tara ***Bhikkhu*** 29.9.2006 Finished 
PAGE39
