***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**SECTION OF *NĀAMAKAMMAŢŢHĀNA*** 

(**PRACTICE ON MENTALITY**) **VOLUME II**  

**Page 101 - 153** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**&** 

**Dr. Khin Maung Aye (Ph.D, Messey)** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiţakadhara*)** 
Vol 2, pg 101-153.doc 

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE-101** 

\3.   ***vedanā*** (feeling) = = the nature of being felt the taste of object; of ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta*** 

[**Notes:**  Whenever  saying  as  “object”  it  should  be  referred  especially  on 

***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta*** only.] 

1. ***saññā*** (perception) = the nature of perceiving the object; 
1. ***cetanā*** (volition) = the nature of willingness to urge associating ***dhammas*** in order to reach on the object; 
1. ***ekaggatā*** (one-pointedness) =the nature of stability of mind on single object;  

=the  nature  of  capable  of  non-spreading  on  the associating ***dhammas*** so as not into occur in disorder; 

4. ***jīvita*** (vitality) = the nature of protecting on associating ***dhammas*** for just mere living one mind moment; 
4. ***manasikāra*** (attention) = the nature of attending the mind towards object; = the nature of taking into heart the object attentively. 
4. ***vitakka*** (initial application) = the nature of applying (or putting) consciousness and mental concomitants on the object; 
4. ***vicāra*** (sustained application) = the nature of continuous sustaining consciousness and mental concomitants on the object; 

=the nature of taking object over and over again; 

8. ***adhimokkha*** (definite decision)= the nature of deciding the object; 
8. ***vīriya*** (effort) = the nature of endeavouring; 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_  Because  this  stage  is  still  developing  concentration,  it  is  the  nature  of endeavouring  in  order  to  be  steadfast  the  mind  of  meditation  on  object  of ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta*** especially during developing concentration or entering into absorption. The effort performs function of supporting so as to be steadfast associating ***dhammas*** on object.] 

10. ***pīti*** (pleasurable interest) = the nature of pleasurable interest on object; 
10. ***chanda*** (wish) = the nature of wishing to take object; 

the nature of wishing to make object; 

12. ***saddhā*** (faith) = the nature of firm faith on training of absorption concentration; 

[ Three trainings are included in (8) situations on which firm faith arise. Firm faith on absorption concentration is also called ***saddhā***.] 

13. ***saţi*** (mindfulness) = It is the nature of capable of submerging of associating ***dhammas*** on wholesome object, Buddha, ***dhamma*** etc., as a slab under water but not floating gourd; 
    1. the nature of steadfastness of mind on object; 
    1. the nature of not forgetting the object; 
13. ***hiri***  (  conscientious  scruples)  =  the  nature  of  conscientious  scruples  about  bodily misconduct; 
13. ***ottappa*** (shame) = the nature of dread about bodily misconduct; 

**PAGE-102** 

[These two kinds of ***dhammas***, ***hiri*** and ***ottappa*** are only mere existing during absorption concentration.  Because  recent  period  is  the  moment  leading  towards  only  object  of ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta***, it is not the period encountering unwholesome deeds directly. Due  to presence  of ***hiri***  and ***ottappa***,  the  righteous ***meditator***  is  fulfilling  three  trainings really. Those two ***dhammas*** are already existing in the continuum of ***meditator*** for all three periods, i.e., before, during, after entering absorption.] 

16. ***a-lobha*** (non-greed) = the nature of non-***atta***chment on mundane objects; 
- the nature of non-obsessing as  “mine” 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_\_\_ Mundane objects means any kind of discerned object called living and non- living sensual objects occurring in (31) realms, such as, visible-object.] 

17. ***a-dosa*** (non-hate) = the nature of non-harsh mind on object; 
    1. the nature of non-desire to destroy the object; 
17. ***tatramajjhattatā*** (equanimity) = the nature of equanimity of mind on object (so as not to  reach  both  extremities  called  conceit  and  sloth-torpor  but  to  attain  balanced consciousness and mental concomitants in respective functions. 
17. ***kāyapassaddhi*** = the nature of tranquility of mental concomitants; 
17. ***citta*** ***passaddhi*** = the nature of tranquility of consciousness; 
17. ***kāya lahutā*** = the nature of agility of mental concomitants; 
17. ***citta*** ***lahutā*** = the nature of agility of consciousness; 
17. ***kāya mudutā*** = the nature of elasticity of mental concomitants; 
17. ***citta mudutā*** = the nature of elasticity of consciousness; 
17. ***kāya kammaññatā*** = the nature of adaptability of mental concomitants; 
17. ***citta*** ***kammaññatā*** = the nature of adaptability of consciousness; 
17. ***kāya  pagunnatā***  =  the  nature  of  proficiency  of  mental  concomitants  in  various wholesome deeds, charity, morality, practice etc.; 
    1. the nature of mastery of mental concomitants 
    1. the nature of void of faulty of defilement; 
17. ***citta*** ***pagunnatā*** = the nature of proficiency of consciousness in various wholesome deeds, charity, morality, practice etc.; 
    1. the nature of mastery of consciousness 
    1. the nature of void of faulty of defilement; 
17. ***kāyujukatā*** = the nature of rectitude of mental concomitants; 
    1. the nature of lack of swerving called pretence and deceit; 
17. ***cittujukatā*** = the nature of rectitude of consciousness 
- the nature of lack of swerving called pretence and deceit; 

**PAGE-103** 

31. ***paññā***  (knowledge)  =  the  nature  of  penetrative  knowing  and  seeing  on  object  of ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta***; (It is also known as ***jhānasammādiţţhi*** = right view or knowledge on absorption.) 

These are (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of the first absorption which arises through taking object of ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta***. All those (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind gradually. 

Showing an example \_\_\_\_\_ Each mental ***dhamma***, such as the consciousness, must be discerned as beginning. When one can discern the consciousness which arises at every mind moment of impulsions forcefully two kinds of mental ***dhammas***, consciousness and contact must be discerned simultaneously. If it is successful to discern remaining mental concomitants, feeling etc., must be discerned through adding one by one until reaching to all (34) mental ***dhammas*** have been discerned simultaneously. Synchronous arising of three, four, five etc., and so forth, of each impulsion must be kept in mind so as to see clearly in the insight. 

After one can discern (34) mental ***dhammas*** of the first absorption clearly, he must continue to discern every consciousness of the first absorption cognitive process in order, viz., 

1. ***monodvārāvajjana***……………………..(12) mental ***dhammas*** 
1. ***parikamma***……………………………..(34) mental ***dhammas*** 
1. ***upacāra***…………………………………(34) mental ***dhammas*** 
1. ***anuloma***…………………………………(34) mental ***dhammas*** 
1. ***gotrabhu***…………………………………(34) mental ***dhammas*** 
1. every impulsion of absorption each……..(34) mental ***dhammas*** 

These  mental  ***dhammas***  must  be  kept  in  mind  through  breaking  down  mass  of mentality called compactness of mental ***dhammas*** (***nāmaghana***) in order to reach the field of ultimate nature. 

***manodvaravajjana***……(12) mental ***dhammas*** 

Those  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  are  ***citta***,  ***phassa***,  ***vedanā***,  ***saññā***,  ***cetanā***, ***ekaggatā***, ***jīvita***, ***manasikāra***, ***vitakka***, ***vicāra***, ***adhimokkha***, ***vīriya***. Those all (12) kinds of mental  ***dhammas***  take  object  of  brilliant  sign  of  full  concentration  of  mindfulness  of breathing. 

**PAGE-104** 

8. **mentality-corporeality must be kept in mind** 

When  one  can  keep  mental ***dhammas***  which  are  occurring  in  the  first absorption cognitive process in mind individually for each mind moment it is instructed to keep all mental ***dhammas*** in mind as a whole in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** as follows:\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-222) (Vs-2-223)*** 

- That righteous ***meditator*** must discern and keep in mind those all kinds of mental 

***dhammas*** (within each mind moment of the first absorption cognitive process) as “these are mental ***dhammas***” through making as a whole in such way that those all ***dhammas*** have the same  characteristic,  i.e.,  capable  of  inclining  towards  object  of  brilliant  sign  of  full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. 

According to this instruction, firstly each mental ***dhamma***, such as, ***citta***, ***phassa***, ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***cetanā*** etc., occurring in every mind moment of first absorption cognitive process must be kept in mind individually. Second, (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of mind- door-adverting,  (34)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  each  absorption  impulsion  must  be discerned so as to see synchronous arising within each mind moment. Afterwards he has to discern the nature of inclining towards object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing and keep in mind as “mental ***dhammas***, mental ***dhammas***” continuously. He must perform both kinds of ways of discerning individually and as a whole. 

[ Notes: \_\_\_\_ In this case, the object of sign of full-concentration of mindfulness of breathing is said as priority because this section is written emphatically on mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. It should be understood similarly on remaining ways of practices. If the righteous ***meditator*** has fulfilled to practice (10) kinds of ***kasiņa***-objects, eight kinds of attainments, four protective meditations  etc.,  he  has  to  keep  mental  ***dhammas***  in  mind  by  following  this  way  of discerning.] 

This is brief account on how absorption mental ***dhammas*** called ***jhāna*** ***dhamma*** can be kept in mind through consciousness as beginning. It should be understood ways of keeping in mind, contact as beginning or feeling as beginning etc., in similar way. 

The commentator ***Sayādaw*** instructed that “***vavatthapetabbam” (Vs-2-222)*** in order to differentiate each ultimate nature, such as ***phassa***, ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***cetanā***, ***viññāņa***, etc., individually  without  seeing  single  mass  of  ultimate  ***dhammas***  of  (34)  kinds  as  a  whole although (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** within each absorption impulsion are kept in mind as a whole through three  ways of keeping  mental ***dhammas*** in mind, i.e., consciousness of beginning, contact as beginning, feeling as beginning. 

**PAGE-105** 

When these  absorption  and associating absorption ***dhammas*** can be  kept in mind clearly through breaking down compactness of each mentality with the help of penetrative insight  those  mental  ***dhammas***  which  are  consisting  in  sensuous  access  concentration impulsion  called  ***parikamma***,  ***upacāra***,  ***anuloma***,  ***gotrabhu***  together  with  mind-door- adverting  must  be  kept  in  mind  continuously.  Afterwards  future  ways  of  practice  are instructed in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** as follows:\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-222)*** 

The essence of above commentary is as follows:\_\_\_ 

As a worldly simile \_\_\_ when a man sees a snake in the house and then he searches it by following, as he sees dwelling place of that snake, similarly \_\_\_\_ when the practicing ***meditator*** scrutinizes in a way that \_\_\_\_ how do these mental ***dhammas*** arise by depending on which ***dhamma***?”. 

He sees the heart-base which is depended base of those mental ***dhammas***. Afterwards, both  four  great  elements  and  derived  corporealities,  other  than  heart-base,  which  arise depending  on  four  great  elements  are  distinguished  and  kept  in  mind.  That  practicing ***meditator*** keeps all corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind through the meaning of capable of changing and altering. Then he distinguishes in brief in such way that \_\_\_ 

1. the ***dhamma*** with nature of inclining towards object is mentality 
1. the ***dhamma*** with nature of capable of changing and altering is corporeality (***Vs-2- 222***) 

According to instruction found in above commentary the practicing person who has finished to keep absorption mental ***dhammas*** in mind must distinguish and keep in mind (54) kinds of corporealities called un-derived and derived corporealities together with the heart- base,  which  are  occurring  in  the  heart,  which  are  depended  base  of  absorption  mental ***dhammas***, continuously. Therefore it will be presented on tables showing absorption mental ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking  object  of  sign  of  full  concentration  of  mindfulness  of breathing and depended base-corporealities as follows:\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-106** 

9. **Object of *ānāsānapaţibhāganimitta* *dhamma***-***object-line-manodvāra***-***jhānasamāpattivīthi*** 



|Depended base within heart |54 |54 |54 |54 |54 |54….. |
| :- | - | - | - | - | - | - |

||***ma*** |***Pa*** |***up*** |***nu*** |***go*** |jh……(numerous tines of absorption impulsions) |
| :- | - | - | - | - | - | :- |
|First absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |34……. |
|Second absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |32… (***vitakka***, ***vicāra*** are removed) |
|Third absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |31. ..(***pīti*** is also removed)*** |
|Fourth absorption |12 |33 |33 |33 |33 |31 … (***sukha*** is removed ***upekkhā*** substitute) |
If   the  righteous  ***meditator***  has  fulfilled  to  practice  (10)  ***kasiņa***-objects  and  (8) attainments, he has to keep mental ***dhammas*** in mind as following table. 

10. **Object of *kasiņapaţibhāga nimitta* *dhamma*-object-line-*manodvāra*-*jhānasamāpattivīthi*** 



|Depended base within heart |54 |54 |54 |54 |54 |54….. |
| :- | - | - | - | - | - | - |
||***ma*** |***pa*** |***up*** |***nu*** |***go*** |jh……(numerous tines of absorption impulsions) |
|First absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |34……. |
|Second absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |32… (***vitakka***, ***vicāra*** are removed) |
|Third absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |31. ..(***pīti*** is also removed) |
|Fourth absorption |12 |33 |33 |33 |33 |31 … (***sukha*** is removed ***upekkhā*** substitute) |
|***ākāsānacāyatanajhāna*** |12 |33 |33 |33 |33 |31…(***upekkhā***, ***ekaggatā***) |
|***viññāņañcāyatana*** ***jhāna*** |12 |33 |33 |33 |33 |31…(***upekkhā***, ***ekaggatā***) |
|***ākiñcaññāyatana*** ***jhāna*** |12 |33 |33 |33 |33 |31…(***upekkhā***, ***ekaggatā***) |
|***nevasaññānāsaññāyatana*** ***jhāna*** |12 |33 |33 |33 |33 |31…(***upekkhā***, ***ekaggatā***) |
11. ***vitakka*-*vicāra*-*pīti*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-1-151) (Abhi-A-2-237)* PAGE-107** 

According to above commentaries sensuous access concentration impulsions called ***parikamma***, ***upacāra***, ***anuloma***, ***gotrabhu*** are associating with ***vitakka***, ***vicāra***, ***pīti***. During full absorption concentration of second absorption etc., ***vitakka*** and ***vicāra*** do not associate with  it.  (It  refers  to  tetrad  method.)  However  during  sensuous  access  concentration impulsions  of  the  fourth  absorption  ***pīti***  does  not  associate  with  those  mind  moments, explained in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** as follows:\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-1-160) (Mahāţī-1-189)*** 

The significance will be explicit. Agreeable feeling can not benefit neutrality feeling called neither-disagreeable nor agreeable feeling (***a-dukkha*** ***masukha*** ***vedanā***) by means of efficiency of relation of habitual recurrence (***āsevanapaccaya***). In the fourth absorption only neutrality feeling ought to associate with it. Therefore four or five times of sensuous access concentration impulsions within the fourth absorption cognitive process also associate with neutrality  feeling  only,  resulting  in  deficiency  of  ***pīti***  in  the  fourth  absorption  cognitive process. ***(Vs-1-160; Mahāţī-1-189)*** 

**Four kinds of Sublime *dhamma*-*jhānasamāpattivīthi*** 

12. ***metta*-sublime *dhamma*** 

|Depended base within heart |54 |54 |54 |54 |54 |54……. |
| :- | - | - | - | - | - | - |
||***ma*** |***pa*** |***up*** |***nu*** |***go*** |jh…(numerous times of absorption impulsions) |
|First absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |34….. |
|Second absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |32…. (***vitakka***, ***vicāra*** are removed) |
|Third absorption |12 |34 |34 |34 |34 |31… (***pīti*** is also removed) |
13. ***karunņā*-sublime *dhamma*** 

|Depended base within heart |54 |54 |54 |54 |54 |54……. |
| :- | - | - | - | - | - | - |
||***ma*** |***pa*** |***up*** |***nu*** |***go*** |jh…(numerous times of absorption impulsions) |
|First absorption |12 |35 |35 |35 |35 |35….. |
|Second absorption |12 |35 |35 |35 |35 |33…. (***vitakka***, ***vicāra*** are removed) |
|Third absorption |12 |35 |35 |35 |35 |32… (***pīti*** is also removed) |
**PAGE-108** 

14. ***muditā*-sublime *dhamma*** 

|Depended base within heart |54 |54 |54 |54 |54 |54……. |
| :- | - | - | - | - | - | - |
||***ma*** |***pa*** |***up*** |***nu*** |***go*** |jh…(numerous times of absorption impulsions) |
|First absorption |12 |35 |35 |35*** |35 |35….. |
|Second absorption |12 |35 |35 |35 |35** |33…. (***vitakka***, ***vicāra*** are removed) |
|Third absorption |12 |35 |35 |35 |35** |32… (***pīti*** is also removed) |
15. ***upekkha*-sublime *dhamma*** 

|Depended base within heart |54 |54 |54 |54 |54 |54……. |
| :- | - | - | - | - | - | - |
||***ma*** |***pa*** |***up*** |***nu*** |***go*** |jh…(numerous times of absorption impulsions) |
|Fourth absorption |12 |33 |33 |33 |33 |31….. |
If  the  righteous ***meditator***  has  got  experience  to practice  meditation  on bone and foulness upto full absorption, he has to discern mental ***dhammas*** of the first absorption as shown in table I and J. Therefore above tables are sufficient for way of discerning absorption mental ***dhammas***. 

For those person with acquired absorption 

***lābhino eva pana mahaggatacittāni supākaţāni honti. (Mahāţī-2-353)*** 

Due  to  presence  of  explanation,  i.e.,  absorption  mental  ***dhammas***  called  lofty consciousness  (***mahaggata***  ***citta***)  are  obvious  in  the  insight  of  only  those  persons  with acquired  absorption,  those  persons  with  acquired  absorption  can  perform  to  discern absorption mental ***dhammas***. Those person who lack absorption called ***sukkhavipassaka*** has to omit discernment of absorption mental ***dhammas***. 

Both  ***jhānalābhī***  (=  the  person  with  acquired  absorption)  and  ***sukkhavipassaka*** persons must continue to discern sensuous mental ***dhammas***. According to explanation found in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga***, 

* ***“evam chasu dvāresu arūpassa nibbatti passitabba. (Vs-2-253),”*** 

The righteous ***meditator*** has to keep the arising of mental ***dhammas*** at (6) kinds of doors in mind thoroughly. 

**PAGE-109 5. Sensuous mental *dhammas* which must be keep in mind previously\_\_\_\_** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-1-271, Vs-2-300)*** 

Some sensuous mental ***dhammas*** take objects of both concept (***paññātti***) and ultimate nature generally. According to instructions of above commentaries, the practicing ***meditator*** must keep mental ***dhammas*** called ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***sańkhāra***, ***viññāņa*** which arise by taking object of corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind previously. 

If any one can find difficulty to keep in mind mental ***dhammas*** in that way, it will be presented way of keeping mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of concept in mind previously, due to occurrence of easily understand to discern those mental ***dhammas***. It is not discerning on object of concept but on object of mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of concept only. It should be recognized the fact it is similar to way of discerning absorption mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of concepts, ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta*** etc. 

Furthermore way of discerning on mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of mental ***dhammas*** are also not shown in this place because it might be very difficult to keep in mind for beginners who begin to practice ***nāmakammaţţhāna***. In the stage of ***vipassanā*** practice those ways of discerning will be presented in corporeal septad method (***rūpasattaka naya***),  non-corporeal  septad  method  (***a-rūpasattakanaya***)  and  stage  of  upper  ***vipassanā*** knowledge, Knowledge of Dissolution (***bhangañāņa***) etc. In this section of Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality and Corporeality, however, it will be presented emphatically on way of discerning  on  sensuous  mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking  object  of  corporeal ***dhammas***. 

**5.A. How (6) kinds of objects can be divided** 

There are (6) kinds of objects of corporeal ***dhammas***, viz., 

1. visible-object (colour), 
1. audible-object (sound), 
1. olfactory-object (smell), 
1. sapid, object (taste), 
1. tactile-object (touch) (= ***pathavī, tejo, vāyo***) 
1. ***dhamma***-object (a) five kinds of transparent corporealities (***pasadarūpa***) 

(b) (16) kinds of subtle corporealities (***sukhumarūpa***). 

If one divides corporeal ***dhammas*** through objects, (6) kinds of objects are available in this way. Among those objects, mental ***dhamma*** which arise by taking object of corporeal ***dhammas*** which are inclusive in ***dhamma***-object, are continuity of sensuous consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process only which are less numbers of kinds of consciousness of cognitive  process,  resulting  in  easy  understanding  for  beginners.  Therefore  it  will  be presented way of keeping mental ***dhammas*** of ***dhamma***-object line in mind previously. 

**PAGE-110** 

**5.B. How (6) lines are calssified** 

There are (6) lines of mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking (6) kinds of object of corporeal ***dhammas*** as follows:\_\_\_ 

1. Mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking visible-object as object are designated as visible-object-line mental ***dhammas***; 
1. Mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking audible-object as object are designated as audible-object-line mental ***dhammas***; 
1. Mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking olfactory-object as object are designated as olfactory -object-line mental ***dhammas***; 
1. Mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking sapid-object as object are designated as sapid- object-line mental ***dhammas***; 
1. Mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking  tactile-object  as  object  are  designated  as tactile-object-line mental ***dhammas***; 
1. Mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking  transparent  corporealities,  subtle corporealities called ***dhamma***-object or any kind of corporealities called ***dhamma***- object as object are designated as ***dhamma***-object-line mental ***dhammas***; 

These  terms  are  applied  for  those  righteous  persons  with  immatured  Knowledge  in ***Abhidhamma*** for easy understanding the usage. 

***Dhamma***-object line sensuous mental ***dhammas***\_\_\_\_ 

Those  ***suddhavipassanāyānika***  persons  who  lack  absorption  have  to  keep  mental ***dhammas*** in mind from these ***dhammas*** as beginning. Those ***samathayānika*** persons with absorption must also keep these ***dhammas*** in mind after discerning on absorption mental ***dhammas*** thoroughly. In this place wholesome group mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of the eye-transparent-element and way of discerning will be presented previously as example for practicing persons with immatured knowledge. 

**5.C. Eye-transparent-element-*dhamma*-object-object** 

Firstly\_\_\_\_ the righteous ***meditator*** has to develop concentration up to the fourth absorption through mindfulness of breathing, which is fundamental of ***vipassanā*** practice. If the righteous ***meditator*** has got ***kasiņa***-objects up to white-***kasiņa***, it will be better to practice up to the fourth absorption. Second, after emerging from that absorption concentration\_\_\_\_  

**PAGE-111** 

1. life-continuum ( = mind-clear-element) must be kept in mind. Afterwards\_\_\_ 
1. he has to take object of the eye-transparent-element. 

(Eye-transparent-element will be kept in mind very easily in this stage because he changes into ***nāmakanmaţţhāna*** after keeping ***rūpakammaţţhāna*** clearly and thoroughly.) 

3. When that eye-transparent-element appears or impinges on the life-continuum mind- clear-element  continuity  of  impulsions  of  mind-door-cognitive  process  will  arise consequently. 
3. The  mind-door-adverting  consciousness  or  the  mental  concomitant  called ***adhimokkha***  (definite  decision)  which  associates  with  mind-door-adverting  within that cognitive process should like to decide as “eye-transparent-element”. It is wise- attention called ***yonisomanasikāra***, resulting in falling wholesome impulsions. 
3. There are (12) kinds, (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** within mind-door-adverting and each  impulsion  respectively.  If  registering  consciousness  also  fall,  (34)  kinds  of mental  ***dhamma***  can  be  seen  in  each  registering  mind  moment.  If  both  kinds  of knowledge and pleasurable interest (***pīti***) associate with those mind moments, there will be  (34)  kinds  of  mental ***dhammas***;  if  any  kind  of  knowledge  or pleasurable interest or both kinds are lacking, there will be (33/32) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** in each impulsion and registering mind moment respectively. 

Among those mental ***dhammas***, (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** within mind-door- adverting mind moment are namely \_\_\_ ***citta***, ***phassa***, ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***cetanā***, ***ekaggatā***, ***jīvita***, ***manasikāra***, ***vitakka***, ***vicāra***, ***adhimokkha***, ***vīriya***. Those (34) mental ***dhammas*** within each impulsion and registering mind moment are as follows:\_\_\_ 

**5.D. (34) kinds of mental *dhammas*** 

1. ***citta*** (consciousness) = nature of acquiring object of eye-transparent-element; 
1. ***phassa*** (contact) = the nature of touching with the object of eye-transparent-element  

`    `(characteristic); 

- the  nature  of  connecting  between  object  of  ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta***   (function);  (In  coming  mental  concomitants  it  should  be recognized on “object” as “object of eye-transparent-element.) 
3. ***vedanā*** (feeling) = = the nature of being felt the taste of object; of ***ānāpānapaţibhāga nimitta*** 
3. ***saññā*** (perception) = the nature of perceiving the object; 
3. ***cetanā*** (volition) = the nature of willingness to urge associating ***dhammas*** in order to reach on the object; 
3. ***ekaggatā*** (one-pointedness) =the nature of stability of mind on single object;  =the nature of capable of non-spreading on the associating ***dhammas*** so as not into occur in disorder; 
3. ***jīvita*** (vitality) = the nature of protecting on associating ***dhammas*** for just mere living one mind moment; 
3. ***manasikāra*** (attention) = the nature of attending the mind towards object; = the nature of taking into heart the object attentively. 
3. ***vitakka*** (initial application) = the nature of applying (or putting) consciousness and mental concomitants on the object; 
3. ***vicāra*** (sustained application) = the nature of continuous sustaining consciousness and mental concomitants on the object; =the nature of taking object over and over again; 
3. ***adhimokkha*** (definite decision)= the nature of deciding the object; 
3. ***vīriya*** (effort) = the nature of endeavouring; 

PAGE-112 

[The term, ***vīriya***, means the nature of endeavouring to arise associating ***dhammas***. However it is explained in this way because the nature of wishing to know is leader and significant one.] 

13. ***pīti*** (pleasurable interest) = the nature of pleasurable interest on object; 
13. ***chanda*** (wish) = the nature of wishing to take object; 

the nature of wishing to make object; 

15. ***saddhā*** (faith) = the nature of firm faith on training of absorption concentration; 

[There are three trainings, training of morality, training of concentration, training of wisdom, which are also known as ***sāsanabrahmacariya***. The ability to see object of ultimate nature called eye-transparent-element penetratively is the mental concomitant called ***paññindriya*** (= controlling  faculty  of  wisdom)  which  is  inclusive  in  the  third  one,  training  of  wisdom. Therefore  the  firm  faith  on  training  of  wisdom  which  sees  penetratively  on  the  eye- transparent-element, is also ***saddhā***. In other words the eye-transparent-element is included in the  list  of  bases  of  ***dhammas***  of  dependent-origination.  The  firm  faith  on  principle  of dependent-origination is also ***saddhā***.] 

16. ***saţi*** (mindfulness) = It is the nature of capable of submerging of associating ***dhammas*** on wholesome object, Buddha, ***dhamma*** etc., as a slab under water but not floating gourd; 
    1. the nature of steadfastness of mind on object; 
    1. the nature of not forgetting the object; 
16. ***hiri***  (  conscientious  scruples)  =  the  nature  of  conscientious  scruples  about  bodily misconduct; 
16. ***ottappa*** (shame) = the nature of dread about bodily misconduct; 

` `[These two kinds of ***dhammas***, ***hiri*** and ***ottappa*** are only mere existing during discerning on eye-transparent-element and ultimate mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of that eye-transparent-element. Because recent period is the moment leading towards only object of eye-transparent-element and mental ***dhammas*** which knows and sees penetratively on the** eye-transparent-element, it is not the period encountering unwholesome deeds directly. Due to presence of ***hiri*** and ***ottappa***, the righteous ***meditator*** is fulfilling three trainings really. Those two ***dhammas*** are already existing in the continuum of ***meditator*** for all three periods, i.e., before, during, after **discerning that element and mental *dhammas***.] 

**PAGE-113** 

19. ***a-lobha*** (non-greed) = the nature of non-***atta***chment on mundane objects; 
- the nature of non-obsessing as “mine” 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_\_\_ Mundane objects means any kind of discerned object called living and non- living sensual objects occurring in (31) realms, such as, visible-object.] 

20. ***a-dosa*** (non-hate) = the nature of non-harsh mind on object; 
    1. the nature of non-desire to destroy the object; 
20. ***tatramajjhattatā*** (equanimity) = the nature of equanimity of mind on object (so as not to  reach  both  extremities  called  conceit  and  sloth-torpor  but  to  attain  balanced consciousness and mental concomitants in respective functions. 
20. ***kāya passaddhi*** = the nature of tranquility of mental concomitants; 
20. ***Citta*** ***passaddhi*** = the nature of tranquility of consciousness; 
20. ***kāya lahutā*** = the nature of agility of mental concomitants; 
25. ***citta*** ***lahutā*** = the nature of agility of consciousness; 
25. ***kāya mudutā*** = the nature of elasticity of mental concomitants; 
25. ***citta mudutā*** = the nature of elasticity of consciousness; 
25. ***kāya kammaññatā*** = the nature of adaptability of mental concomitants; 
25. ***citta*** ***kammaññatā*** = the nature of adaptability of consciousness; 

[The reason why the eye-transparent-element can be easily discerned is due to efficiency of these mental concomitants called ***kammaññatā***. It is the nature of adaptability of practice which discerns on the eye-transparent-element. It should be recognized similarly onway of keeping  mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of the  eye-transparent-element in mind again. It should be recognized similarly on remaining kinds of ultimate nature.] 

30. ***kāya  pāguññatā***  =  the  nature  of  proficiency  of  mental  concomitants  in  various wholesome deeds, charity, morality, practice etc.; 
- the nature of mastery of mental concomitants 
- the nature of void of faulty of defilement; 
31. ***citta pāguññatā*** = the nature of proficiency of consciousness in various wholesome deeds, charity, morality, practice etc.; 
    1. the nature of mastery of consciousness 
    1. the nature of void of faulty of defilement; 
31. ***kāyu jukatā*** = the nature of rectitude of mental concomitants; 
    1. the nature of lack of swerving called pretence and deceit; 
31. ***cittujukatā*** = the nature of rectitude of consciousness 
    1. the nature of lack of swerving called pretence and deceit; 
31. ***paññā*** (knowledge) = the nature of penetrative knowing and seeing on object of eye- transparent-element;  

**PAGE-114** 

[Among  four  kinds  of  right  view  called  ***catusacca***  ***sammādiţţhi***,  according  to  the  term, ***dukkha*** nanam, the right view which knows and sees the Noble Truth of Suffering is also included. In accordance with the preaching of ***dhammacakka*** ***pavattana***, i.e., “***samkhittena pañcupādānakkhandhā*** ***dukkha***”, five kinds of clinging aggregates (***upādanakkhandhā***) are designated  as ***dukkha*** ***sacca***.  Corporeal  aggregate  is  also  included  in  those  five  clinging aggregates.  The  eye-transparent-element  is  also  included  in  those  corporeal  aggregate ***dhammas***. Therefore the mental concomitant called ***paññindriya*** (=knowledge) which knows and  sees  the  eye-transparent-element  penetratively,  is  ***sammādiţţhi  ñāņa***  (=  right  view knowledge) which knows and sees partial of ***dukkha*** ***sacca*** really.] 

**5. E. Great Wholesome consciousness…..(8) kinds** 

When  either  eye-transparent-elements  or  mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking object  of  eye-transparent-element  are  discerned  frequently  pleasurable  interest  called  ***pīti*** does not arise sometimes. At that time the feeling is neutrality feeling, resulting in (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas***. 

Sometimes mind of meditation usually takes other objects but not eye-transparent- element, resulting in alternate knowing on outside object and eye-transparent-element within very  short  instant.  Knowing  as  object  of  the  eye-transparent-element  does  not  disappear completely. It is mere knowing as transparent-element without associating knowledge. At that  time  the  consciousness  which  does  not  associate  with  knowledge  knows  and  sees continuously on object of ultimate nature although it can not know and see new kinds of ultimate ***dhammas*** penetratively.  If it is associated with pleasurable interest at that time, numbers of mental ***dhammas*** will be (33) and the feeling is agreeable feeling. 

If it is not associated with both kind of pleasurable interest and knowledge, numbers of  mental  ***dhammas***  will  be  (32),  the  feeling  will  be  neutrality  feeling,  due  to  lack  of pleasurable  interest.  Thus  there  are  (4)  kinds  of  great  wholesome  consciousness  as follows:\_\_\_ 

1. If both kinds of knowledge and pleasurable interest are associated\_\_\_ joyful great wholesome consciousness, associated with knowledge………. (34) 
1. If  only  knowledge  is  associated  but  not  pleasurable  interest\_\_\_\_  neutral  great wholesome consciousness, associated with knowledge………(33) 
1. If the  knowledge is not associated but pleasurable interest only is associated\_\_\_\_ joyful great wholesome consciousness, without knowledge…………(33) 
1. If both kinds of knowledge and pleasurable interest are not associated\_\_\_ neutrality wholesome consciousness, without knowledge…..(32) 

***sasańkhārika - a-sańkhārika*** 

If one has got prompted mind in order to arise any kind of above four kinds or all four kinds, by himself or others, those (4) kinds of great wholesome consciousness are prompted ones (***sasańkhārika***); if one has got unprompted mind in that way, those (4) kinds of great wholesome  consciousness  are  unprompted  ones  called  ***a-sańkhārika***.  If  both  kinds  of prompted  and  unprompted  are  added,  there  will  be  (8)  kinds  of  great  wholesome consciousness in total. 

**PAGE-115** 

In this case there is no variation in numbers of mental ***dhammas*** relating to either prompted mind or unprompted mind. The nature of prompted mind and unprompted mind can be  understood  gradually  during  discerning  oneself.  Therefore  only  (4)  kinds  of  great wholesome consciousness are presented in this place. 

**5.F. Three ways of discerning on mental *dhammas*** 

Ways  of  discerning  on  both  absorption  mental  ***dhammas***  and  sensuous  mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking objects of corporeal ***dhammas*** are mentioned previously. 

In these commentaries and respective sections, namely\_\_\_\_ 

1. ***Mūlapaññāsa*** ***(M-A-1-280, 281)***, section of ***vedanānupassanā***, 
1. ***Sakkapañha Sutta (Dī-A-2-314, 315)*** section of ***vedanānupassanā***, 
1. ***Sammohavinodanī (Abhi-A-2- 252, 253)*** section of ***vedanānupassanā***, 
1. ***Visuddhi Magga (Vs-2-226, 227)***, section of ***diţţhivisuddhi***, it can be found three ways of discerning on mental ***dhammas***, viz., 
1. way of discerning through contact as beginning, 
1. way of discerning through feeling as beginning, 
1. way of discerning through consciousness as beginning. 

Among those three ways of discerning \_\_\_\_ 

1. the  practicing  person  with  apparent  contact  in  the  insight,  if  he  keeps  mental ***dhammas*** in mind through the contact as beginning, ought not keep only contact in mind but he has to continue to keep all associating mental ***dhammas*** which are led by ***phassapañcamaka*** ***dhamma*** (= ***dhammas*** with contact as fifth factor) called ***phassa***, ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***cetanā***, ***viññāņa*** in mind thoroughly. 
1. the  practicing  person  with  apparent  feeling  in  the  insight,  if  he  keeps  mental ***dhammas*** in mind through the feeling as beginning, ought not keep only feeling in mind but he has to continue to keep all associating mental ***dhammas*** which are led by ***phassapañcamaka*** ***dhamma*** (= ***dhammas*** with contact as fifth factor) called ***phassa***, ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***cetanā***, ***viññāņa*** in mind thoroughly. 
1. the practicing person with apparent consciousness in the insight, if he keeps mental ***dhammas***  in  mind  through  the  consciousness  as  beginning,  ought  not  keep  only consciousness in mind but he has to continue to keep all associating mental ***dhammas*** which  are  led  by  ***phassapañcamaka***  ***dhamma***  (=  ***dhammas***  with  contact  as  fifth factor) called ***phassa***, ***vedanā***, ***saññā***, ***cetanā***, ***viññāņa*** in mind thoroughly. 

***sabbam bhikkhave abhiññeyyam (Sam-2-258, Khu-9-6)*** 

***sabbañca kho bhikkhave abhijanam. (Sam-2-250)*** 

According  to  above  preachings  of  the  Exalted  One,  during  discerning  mental ***dhammas*** all kinds of associating mental ***dhammas*** within the same mind moment must be kept  in  mind  thoroughly  because  only  when  all  kinds  of  corporeality-mentality  can  be distinguished through three kinds of full understanding called ***pariññā***, can one extinguish disaster  of  suffering  of  rounds  of  rebirth,  resulting  in  realization  on ***nibbāna***.  Then  it  is explained  in  sub-commentary  that  explanation  on  ***phassapañcamaka***  ***dhamma***  is accomplished through preaching methodology called ***padhānanaya*** (significant method) in commentaries. (***M-ţī-1-370***) 

**PAGE-116** 

According  to  instructions  found  in  above  commentaries  and  sub-commentary,  it should be recognized the fact during keeping mental ***dhammas*** in mind through any kind of mental ***dhammas*** called contact, feeling, consciousness, as beginning every one must keep all associating mental ***dhammas*** in mind but not pure contact or feeling or consciousness. 

**5.G. Four kinds of *anupassanā* (= contemplation)** 

1. If one keeps conditioned things called corporeality-mentality-causes-results in mind through  corporeal  ***dhammas***  as  priority  and  he  performs  ***vipassanā***  discerning  on those conditioned things through three general characters, it can be said he develops ***kāya***-***nupassanā*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** (contemplation on bodily constituents). 
1. If one keeps conditioned things called corporeality-mentality-causes-results in mind through feeling as priority and he performs ***vipassanā*** discerning on those conditioned things through three general characters, it can be said he develops ***vedanā***-***nupassanā*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** (contemplation on feeling). 
1. If one keeps conditioned things called corporeality-mentality-causes-results in mind through  consciousness  as  priority  and  he  performs  ***vipassanā***  discerning  on  those conditioned things through three general characters, it can be said he develops ***cittā***- ***nupassanā*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** (contemplation on consciousness). 
1. If one keeps conditioned things called corporeality-mentality-causes-results in mind through  contact  as  priority  and  he  performs  ***vipassanā***  discerning  on  those conditioned  things  through  three  general  characters,  it  can  be  said  he  develops ***dhammā***-***nupassanā*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** (contemplation on ***dhamma*** phenomena). 

Furthermore \_\_\_\_ if one performs ***vipassanā*** practice through discerning on those conditioned things after dividing any way of the followings\_\_\_  

1. five hindrances (***nīvaraņa***) method, 
1. five aggregates (***khandhā*** ) method, 
1. twelve bases (***āyatana***) method, 
1. eighteen elements (***dhātu***) method, 
1. seven factors of enlightenment (***bujjhanga***) method, 
1. twofold ***dukkhasacca*** and ***samudaya*** ***sacca***, 

it can be said he develops ***dhammā*** ***nupassanā*** ***saţipaţţhāna*** only. 

**PAGE-117** 

Among  three  ways  of  keeping  mental  ***dhammas***  in  mind  mentioned  above,  the  way  of keeping  mental  ***dhammas***  in  mind,  through  the  feeling  as  beginning  is  called ***vedanānupassanā***  ***saţipaţţhāna***,  while  through  the  consciousness  as  beginning ***cittanupassanā***  ***saţipaţţhāna***;  through  the  contact  as  beginning,  ***dhammā***  ***nupassanā*** ***saţipaţţhāna***,  respectively.  In  this  work  it  is  presented  on  the  way  of  keeping  mental ***dhammas*** in mind through the consciousness as beginning. If one understands on this method systematically, he can not find any difficulty to discern through remaining two ways. The righteous  mediator  must  keep  consciousness  in  mind  as  priority  during  keeping  mental ***dhammas*** in that way. 

The righteous ***meditator*** must discern the phenomenon of arising of consciousness only  [in  sequence  of  mind-door-adverting  (7)  times  of  impulsions  and  (2)  times  of registering] within numerous cognitive processes separated by life-continuums. When he is mastery in discerning consciousness only he has to continue to discern synchronous arising of consciousness and contact called ***phassa*** within same mind-moment. Afterward he has to discern in order to see synchronous arising of (12) mental ***dhammas*** of mind-door-adverting; (34) mental ***dhammas*** of each impulsion; (34) mental ***dhammas*** of each registering through gradual increment of mental ***dhammas*** which can be kept in mind clearly. 

Very important instruction in way of keeping sensuous mental ***dhammas*** in mind can be found in commentary called ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga***, and then it has been presented in page (8) etc.,  of this volume. That instruction is that \_\_\_ the righteous ***meditator*** who wants to keep mental ***dhammas*** in mind must has got ***rūpapariggaha ñāņa*** (= Knowledge of Discerning on Corporeality). 

5. **H. If mental *dhammas* are unapparent** 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-225)*** 

When the practicing ***meditator*** who has accomplished to keep corporeal ***dhammas*** in mind continues to keep mental ***dhammas*** in mind through either any way of three ways of keeping  mental  ***dhammas***  in  mind  or  any  way  of  discerning  methods,  i.e.,  twofold corporeality-mentality  method,  fivefold  aggregates  method,  twelvefold  bases  method, eighteenfold elements method, if those mental ***dhammas*** are unapparent in his insight, due to very subtle occurrence of mental ***dhammas***, he should like to scrutinize, take into heart, distinguish,  discriminate  corporeal  ***dhammas***  only  by  means  of  characteristics,  function, manifestation, proximate cause over and over again for every day, without abandoning the burden of practice on mentality. 

**PAGE-118** 

The advantages are \_\_\_\_ when one scrutinizes corporeal ***dhammas*** by means of such and  such  states  of  affairs;  when  one  takes  into  heart  corporeal  ***dhammas***  through characteristic,  function,  manifestation,  proximate  cause;  when  one  distinguishes, discriminates  corporeal  ***dhammas*** through  lacking  intermingling  each  other  the  corporeal ***dhammas*** appear clearly in the insight of his continuum; there is no interminglement each other, due to appearance of corporeal ***dhammas*** separately each other as spreading of iron- mesh canopy with diamond shaped design; those corporeal ***dhammas*** are thoroughly purified and obvious in the insight. Mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of those corporeal ***dhammas***  appear  automatically  and  naturally  in  the  insight  of  that  practicing  person depending  on  those  various  arrangement  of  ways  of  taking  into  heart,  bearing  in  mind, scrutinizing. **(Vs-2-225)** 

It should be recognized during keeping mental ***dhammas*** in mind, if those ***dhammas*** are unapparent in the insight, he must scrutinize corporeal ***dhammas*** over and over through characteristics, function, manifestation, proximate cause, so as to be clearer and clearer in the insight.  This  is  invaluable  instruction  that  only  when  one  is  mastery  in  practice  of corporeality can he transfer into practice of mentality successfully. 

**Simile of mirror\_\_\_\_\_** It will be explicit. \_\_\_ If the man with good sight who sees image of his face on the   surface of unclear mirror can not appear obviously, that man ought not to abandon mirror, due to the reason as “image of my face can not appear”. Actually he should like  to  scrub  that  mirror  over  and  over.  Image  of  the  face  will  be  reflected  apparently naturally for that man. 

**Simile of oil-press (ox driven) \_\_\_\_** If sesame oil is not released through squeezing sesame powder in the ox driven oil-press one or two times after pouring hot water, the man who wants sesame oil should not abandon sesame power. Actually he should like to squeeze that sesame  powder  over  and  over  again  after  pouring  hot  water.  Very  clear  sesame  oil  can usually be produced for that man who performs in that way. 

**Simile of seeds of Strychnos Potatorum \_\_\_\_\_**  

If  the  turbid  water  does  not become  clear  through rubbing  the pot  with  seeds  of Strychnos potatorum, a tree bearing nuts the seeds of which can be used to clear turbid water, after only tow or three times rubbing for a man who wants to clear turbid water, he ought not abandon those seeds, Actually he should like to rub the inner wall of pot with those seeds over and over again. After performing in that way morass settles and turbid water becomes clearer and clearer.  

**PAGE\_119** 

Similarly \_\_\_\_\_ if those mental ***dhammas*** are unapparent in his insight, due to very subtle occurrence of mental ***dhammas***, that practicing *bhikkhu* should like to scrutinize, take into heart,  distinguish,  discriminate  corporeal  ***dhammas***  only  by  means  of  characteristics, function,  manifestation,  proximate  cause  over  and  over  again  for  every  day,  without abandoning the burden of practice on mentality. 

When he performs in that way corporeal ***dhammas*** appear clearly in the insight of that practising ***bhikkhu***; there is no interminglement each other, due to appearance of corporeal ***dhammas***  separately  each  other  as  spreading  of  iron-mesh  canopy  with  diamond  shaped design; those corporeal ***dhammas*** are thoroughly purified and obvious in the insight. At that time  morass  of  defilements,  delusion  etc,  which  are  opposite  of  the  knowledge  and  are capable of concealing so as not to know mental ***dhammas***; settles and sinks; the mind of meditation become clearer and clearer as clear water existing over morass, with the result that mental ***dhammas***, which have got objects of corporeal ***dhammas*** only, which arise by taking objects of those corporeal ***dhammas*** only, become apparent naturally and automatically.  ***(Vs-2-225,226)*** 

Now  it  will  be  presented  again  on  way  of  keeping  mental  ***dhammas***  of  great wholesome impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process, which arise by taking object of the eye-transparent-element, in mind in brief as follows: - 

**5. I Cascade of practice** 

1. Concentration  must be developed again until the fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing; after emerging from that absorption \_\_\_\_\_\_ 
1. All kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** existing in (6) doors, (42) bodily parts must be kept in mind again; 
1. The  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  must  be  kept  in  mind  and  distinguished  by insight; 
1. After wards \_\_\_\_\_  the eye-=transparent-element must be taken as object and kept in mind  

**PAGE-120** 

When that eye-transparent-element appears or impinges into the life-continuum mind-clear- element, continuity of impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process which know (=take object of) that eye-transparent-element arise consequently. 

1. When the mind-door-adverting within that mind-door-cognitive process determines as the eye-transparent-element\_\_\_\_\_ continuities of consciousness of cognitive process, which know and discerns as eye-transparent-element will arise continuously but separated by life-continuums. Similarly \_\_\_\_\_ continuities of impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process…. 
1. which are knowing, discerning as corporeal ***dhammas*** when that eye-transparent-element is determined as corporeal ***dhamma***; 
1. which are knowing, discerning as ***anicca***, when he determines as ***anicca*** through  taking object of phenomena of perishing away after arising of that eye-transparent-element; 
1. which are knowing, discerning as ***dukkha***, when he determines as ***dukkha*** through  taking object of nature of being oppressed by incessant phenomena of arising and perishing away of that eye-transparent-element; 
1. which are knowing, discerning as ***anatta***, when he determines as ***anatta*** through  taking object of nature of not self which is non-destructible essence and durable one of that eye- transparent-element; 
1. which are knowing, discerning as ***asubha***, when he determines as ***asubha*** through  taking object of nature of loathsomeness through mixing up with bad smell etc., of that eye- transparent-element; 

will arise respectively. 

Above kinds of determining as 

1. eye-transparent-element, 
1. corporeal ***dhamma***, 
1. ***anicca***, 
1. ***dukkha***,*** 
1. ***anatta***, 
1. ***asubha***, are wise attention called ***yonisomanasikāra***. The basic meaning of that wise attention  is  group  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  mind-door-adverting  (=12  kinds  of  mental ***dhammas***) which are fundamental of impulsion of mind-door-cognitive process (***javana paţipadaka manasikāra***). Due to occurrence of right way of taking into heart through mind-door-adverting, wholesome impulsions will fall in continuums of worldly persons and fulfilling persons (***sekkha puggala***) 

***Pāli Quotation (Ang-1-12) (Ang-1-13)* PAGE-121** 

***Bhikkhus***… for the person with wise attention not only un-experienced wholesome ***dhammas*** arise but experienced unwholesome ***dhammas*** also diminish. (***Ang-1-12***) 

***Bhikkhus***… for the person with wise attention not only un-experienced factors of enlightenment ***dhammas*** arise but experienced factors of enlightenment ***dhammas*** also reach into accomplishment of practice. (***Ang-1-13***) 

According to above ***Pāli*** Text, if wise attention is available, wholesome impulsion will fall, if wise attention is in-available, unwise attention will give rise to fall unwholesome impulsions.  Thus  wise  attention  is proximate  cause to  fall  wholesome  impulsions.  If  the righteous ***meditator*** wants to keep continuity of wholesome impulsions of cognitive process in mind, he has to try to arise wise attention. If he tries to that way unexperienced controlling faculties,  strength  (***bala***),  factors  of  path  ***dhammas***  will  arise  apparently;  experienced controlling faculties, strength, factors of path ***dhammas*** will also reach into accomplishment of practice (= up to the Path-Knowledge of Arahant). 

This is the work of raising the mind without least danger up to the apex stage called the Noble Path-Knowledge of Arahant, the Noble Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant. 

Among those (6) kinds of wise attention, the righteous ***meditator*** should keep number 1, continuity of impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process which are knowing, discerning as the eye-transparent-element in mind previously. The practising ***meditator*** can keep in mind any one of three kinds, i.e, consciousness, contact, feeling, as beginning as he likes. 

If he keep consciousness in mind as beginning, he must try to see, distinguish how consciousness arises through the fixed route of mind called 

1. mind-door-adverting ……  (1) time, 
1. impulsions …..  (7) times, 
1. registering …..  (2) times generally. In this case it is said "generally" because registering can not fall sometimes, if object of the eye-transparent- element becomes unapparent insight of ***meditator***. 

When the eye-transparent-element appears or impinges on the life-continuum mind-clear- element  the  righteous  ***meditator***  has  to  try  in  order  to  see  the  phenomena  of  arising  of continuity of impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process, which are knowing on that eye- transparent-element, through basing on the life-continuum mind-clear-element and depending on the heart-base. 

**PAGE-122** 

He will be successful finally because it is the way of practice by which base (***vatthu***) and object are being kept in mind in combination system. 

When he is mastery in discerning consciousness only he has to continue to discern synchronous arising of consciousness and contact called ***phassa*** within same mind-moment. Afterward he has to discern in order to see synchronous arising of (12) mental ***dhammas*** of mind-door-adverting; (34) mental ***dhammas*** of each impulsion; (34) mental ***dhammas*** of each registering through gradual increment of mental ***dhammas*** which can be kept in mind clearly. 

During discerning in that way, there are (4) kinds of great wholesome consciousness in impulsions and registering mind moments as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

5. If both kinds of knowledge and pleasurable interest are associated\_\_\_ joyful great wholesome consciousness, associated with knowledge………. (34) 
5. If  only  knowledge  is  associated  but  not  pleasurable  interest\_\_\_\_  neutral  great wholesome consciousness, associated with knowledge………(33) 
5. If the  knowledge is not associated but pleasurable interest only is associated\_\_\_\_ joyful great wholesome consciousness, without knowledge…………(33) 
5. If both kinds of knowledge and pleasurable interest are not associated\_\_\_ neutrality wholesome consciousness, without knowledge…..(32) 

He has to discern through these four ways, during 

1. discerning as the eye-transparent-element, 
1. discerning as corporeal ***dhamma*** by taking object of eye-transparent-element, 
1. discerning as ***anicca***, 
1. discerning as ***dukkha***, 
1. discerning as ***anatta***, 
1. discerning as ***asubha*** respectively. 

Thus he has to discern (4x6=24) ways in total 

* ***so sabbepi te arūpadhamme namanalakkhaņena ekato katvā "etam nāma" anti passati. (Vs-2-223)*** 

When righteous ***meditator*** can keep each mental ***dhamma*** within every mind moment of cognitive process in mind up to the field of ultimate nature he must discern as "**these are mental *dhamma***" or "**mental *dhammas*, mental *dhamma***" by taking object of nature of inclining toward the eye-transparent-element of those mental ***dhammas.*** 

**PAGE-123** 

***sasańkhārika - a-sańkhārika*** 

If one has got prompted mind in order to arise any kind of above four kinds or all four kinds, by himself or others, those (4) kinds of great wholesome consciousness are prompted ones (***sasańkhārika***); if one has got unprompted mind in that way, those (4) kinds of great wholesome  consciousness  are  unprompted  ones  called  ***a-sańkhārika***.  If  both  kinds  of prompted  and  unprompted  are  added,  there  will  be  (8)  kinds  of  great  wholesome consciousness in total. 

In this case there is no variation in numbers of mental ***dhammas*** relating to either prompted mind or unprompted mind. The nature of prompted mind and unprompted mind can be  understood  gradually  during  discerning  oneself.  Therefore  only  (4)  kinds  of  great wholesome consciousness are presented in this place. (It should be recognized similarly on great mere functioning consciousness which arise in the continuum of mind of Arahants only) Table showing ***dhamma***-object-line, pure mind-door-cognitive process, wholesome group 



|depended base within heart       =  |54 |54 |54 ||
| :- | - | - | - | :- |
|mind-door-adverting ||<p>Impulsion </p><p>(7) times </p>|<p>Registering </p><p>(2) times </p>|<p>Discern </p><p>(4) ways </p>|
|<p>1. discerning as  </p><p>`    `eye-transparent-     </p><p>element \_\_\_\_  </p>|12 |34 |34 |associated with ***ñãņa*** + ***pīti*** |
||12 |33 |33 |associated with ***ñãņa*** but not ***pīti*** |
||12 |33 |33 |without ***ñãņa*** but associated with ***pīti*** |
||12 |32 |32 |Without both ***ñãņa*** and ***pīti*** |
|2. as corporeal ……     ***dhamma*** |12 |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |<p>Discern </p><p>(4) ways </p>|
|3. as ***anicca***    …….. |12 |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |<p>Discern </p><p>(4) ways </p>|
|4. as ***dukkha***   …….. |12 |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |<p>Discern </p><p>(4) ways </p>|
|5. as ***anatta***     …….. |12 |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |<p>Discern </p><p>(4) ways </p>|
|6. as ***asubha***    …….. |12 |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |34 ( 33  33  32 ) |<p>Discern </p><p>(4) ways </p>|
**PAGE-124** 

**5.J  To be understood \_\_\_\_\_** 

In this case the righteous ***meditator*** has to understand the fact he is discerning on the consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  which  know  and  see  the  eye-transparent-element only  

1. as the eye-transparent-element only 
1. as corporeal ***dhamma***; 
1. as ***anicca***, 
1. as ***dukkha***, 
1. as ***anatta***, 
1. as ***a-subha***, respectively .. 

Real corporealities which must be discerned in similar way 

1. ear-transparent-element  
1. nose- transparent-element 
1. tongue- transparent-element 
1. body- transparent-element 
1. the water-element (***āpodhātu***) 
1. femininity corporeality (***itthibhāva rūpa***) 
1. virility corporeality (***purisabhāva rūpa***) 
1. heart-base-corporeality 
9. vitality (***jivita*** ***rūpa***) 
9. nutriment (***ojā*** ***rūpa***) 

There are (11) kinds of real corporealities, including eye-transparent-element, which are inclusive in the list of ***dhamma***-object. If any person wants to select and discern the eye- transparent-element, he must analyze eye-decad corporeal unit and then he has to select and discern eye-transparent-element. After wards he must discern mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of the eye-transparent-element as shown in above table. Similarly he can discern mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of remaining real corporealities, ear- transparent-element  etc.,  through  analyzing  respective  corporeal  units  and  selecting  each ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** as shown in above table. He has to discern in order to reach  ultimate  nature  of  both  discerned  object,  i.e.,  corporeal  ***dhammas***  and  discerning mental ***dhammas*** through breaking down each compactness called ***ghana***.  

Among those discerned objects, male ***meditator*** must discern only virility corporeality while female ***meditator*** must discern only femininity corporeality for internal aspect. For external aspect both kinds of sex-corporealities can be discerned as a whole, due to the same occurrence as external objects. 

**6. Essential notes relating to registering consciousness**  

**A. Explanation found in commentary called *Sammohavinodanī*** 

It  has  been  explained  in  page  (38-41)  that  ***tadārammaņa***  means  a  kind  of consequence consciousness which takes object taken by impulsions. The righteous ***meditator*** should like to understand which kind of registering can fall or not after impulsions because he has to discern registering consciousness which continue to fall after impulsions. With relating to this fact it is explained in commentary called ***sammohavinodanī*** as follows : \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-174)*** 

These (11) kinds of consciousness which continue to take object of impulsions which can perform function of registering consciousness, viz; 

1. great consequence consciousness   …..  (8) kinds 
1. rootless wholesome consequence joyful investigating consciousness …..  (1) kind 
1. rootless consequence neutral investigating consciousness …..  (1) kind 
1. rootless unwholesome consequence neutral investigating consciousness   (1) kind in total        = (11) kinds 

Those (11) kinds of consciousness which are capable of benefiting or performing function of registering, which are worth designating as registering consciousness can not occur as registering; can not perform function of registering; can not take the object which is taken  by  impulsions,  if  impulsions  fall  through  taking  object  of  either  concept  of nomenclature  or  concept  of  lineage  (concept  of  nomenclature  called  ***uddicca  brahma***, concept of lineage called ***Gotama***). (If means any kind of those consciousness never arise by performing function of registering, by taking object which is taken by impulsions.) 

**PAGE-126** 

2. If impulsions fall by taking objects of various concepts, man, woman, person, being etc., other than concept of nomenclature, concept of lineage, registering is not available after those impulsions. 
2. After various ***vipassanā*** impulsions, i.e., knowledge of Contemplation on Impermanence, Knowledge of Contemplation on Suffering, Knowledge of Contemplation on Non-self, during arising of ***vipassanā*** impulsion with objects of states of affairs of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, registering is not available. 
2. During arising of very powerful ***vipassanā*** impulsions which are factors of reaching to the Noble Path-knowledge which emerges from incessant phenomena of conditioned things called ***sańkhāra pavatta***, registering is not available. 
2. If impulsions fall by taking objects of fine-material and immaterial ***dhammas*** which are called lofty ***dhammas***, registering is not available after those impulsions. 
2. These (5) kinds of unwholesome actions with fixed nature of giving rise to occur in woeful existences after death, viz., 
1) matricide (***mātughātaka kamma***) 
1) patricide (***pitughātaka kamma***) 
1) killing of Arahant (***aranhantaghātaka kamma***) 
1) causing to be extravasated and contusion on body of the Exalted One (***lohituppādaka kamma***) 
1) creating  dissension  among  ***sańghā***  (***sańghā***  ***bhedaka***  ***kamma***),  are  called ***anantariyakamma*** (deed which consigns a perpetrator to ***avici*** hell. 

These (3) kinds of wrong views, viz.,  

1) ***ahetukavāda*** = wrong view by which one believes causeless phenomena, 
1) ***akiriyavāda*** = wrong view by which one believes even though one does, it can not be said as doing, 
1) ***natthikavāda*** = wrong view by which one believes non-result phenomena, are wrong views  which  reject  action  (***kamma***)  and  its  consequence  (***kamma***  ***vipāka***),  which  are called ***niyata*** ***micchādiţţhi*** (wrong view which consigns a person with that view to woeful existences certainly.) 

Those  (5)  kinds  of  ***anantariyakamma***  and  ***niyata***  ***micchādiţţhi***  are  called ***micchattaniyata***  ***dhamma***.  (fixed  nature  of  law  by  which  perpetrator  will  reach  hell certainly). 

***(Abhi-A-1-21)*** 

During arising of those ***micchattaniyatadhamma*** registering is not available. 

**PAGE-127** 

[ As the Noble Path ***dhamma*** can be accomplished through ***vipassanā*** practice called wholesome practice, ***micchattaniyata dhamma*** can be accomplished through unwholesome practice.  If  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  arise  repeatedly  over  and  over,  it  can  give  rise  to proliferate defilements resulting in designating as ***bhāvanā*** (=practice). It is called ***akusala*** ***bhāvanā*** (unwholesome practice). That unwholesome practice can produce a kind of wrong concentration (***micchā samādhi***). Because one can believe into ***micchattaniyata*** depending on that wrong concentration, those ***micchattaniyata*** ***dhammas*** are powerful. Therefore if ***impulsions***  fall  in  those  ***micchattaniyata***  ***dhammas***,  registering  is  not  worth  arising  by following  to  impulsions.  Therefore  registering  is  rejected  in  ***micchattaniyata***  ***dhammas***. (***Mūlaţī-2-103***)] 

7. After Supra-mundane impulsions of Noble Path called ***sammattaniyata*** (fixed nature of law  by  which  the  Noble  one  will  reach  joyful  destination  certainly),  which  are  not inclusive  in  suffering  of  rounds  of  rebirth  registering  is  not  available.  (It  means registering can not fall within the Path cognitive processes (***maggavīthi.***) 
7. If impulsions fall by taking objects of supramundane ***dhammas*** called four Noble Path ***dhammas***, four Noble Fruit ***dhammas*** and ***nibbāna***, registering is not available. 

[ It means registering can not fall after  

1) reviewing impulsions which take object of four Noble Path ***dhammas*** ; 
1) reviewing impulsions which take object of four Noble Fruit ***dhammas***; 
1) reviewing impulsions which take object of ***nibbāna*** ; 

`     `Further more registering can not fall after 

4) impulsions of Path (-moment), Fruit (-moment) which take object of ***nibbāna***, within Path cognitive processes ; 
4) impulsions of Fruit (moments) which take object of ***nibbāna***, within Fruit-absorption – cognitive process (***phalasamāpatti vīthi***).  

Even  though  according  to  the  word,  this  supramundane  ***dhamma***,  Noble  Path ***dhammas***  are  also  included,  the  reason  why  ***sammattaniyata***  ***dhammas***  are  explained separately, is that it is in order to show the occurrence of not arising factor of registering, due to  presence  of  opposite  and  powerful  nature  of  ***sammattaniyata***  ***dhammas***  and ***micchattaniyatadhammas***. [***Mūlaţī-2-104***] 

9. If  impulsion  falls  by  taking  object  of  Super-psychic  Knowledge  called  ***Abhiñāņa***, registering is not available. 
9. If impulsion falls by  taking object of Discriminative  knowledge called ***patisambhidā ñāņa,*** registering is not available.  
9. Registering is not available by taking objects of weak sensual corporeality and mentality. [It means ***mahantārammaņa, parittārammaņa, atiparittārammaņa*** which have got life- span of less than (17) mind moments and very weak and unobvious ***avibhūtārammaņa***.] 
9. Only  when  powerful  object  with  sufficient  life-span  which  can  give  rise  to  fall registering, i.e., ***atimahantārammaņa*** falls in fivefold doors; ***vibhūtārammaņa*** falls in the mind-door; registering is available. 

**PAGE-128** 

13. Although it is available only sensuous object can give rise to fall registering. 
13. There is no registering in planes of fine-material and immaterial spheres. 

These are explanations found in olden day commentaries. (***Abhi-A-2-147***) 

In accordance with above commentaries, generally registering can fall after impulsion only when these three factors, viz, 

1. occurrence of sensuous impulsions, 
1. occurrence of sensuous being, 
3. occurrence of sensuous object, 

are completely united. 

Sensuous object means sensuous consciousness, mental concomitants and (28) kinds of corporealities which are designated as sensuous ***dhammas***. In the continuum of sensuous being  registering  can  fall  after  sensuous  impulsion  within  sensuous  mind-door-cognitive process which arise by taking object of sensuous ***dhammas*** called sensuous consciousness and metal concomitants. 

Sensuous impulsions means (29) kinds of impulsions, namely, 

1. unwholesome impulsions …….    (12) kinds, 
1. great wholesome impulsions …….   (  8) kinds, 
1. great mere functioning impulsions …….  (  8) kinds, 
1. ***hasituppāda*** impulsions  …….  (  1) kind 

in total     =       29  kinds. 

Among those kinds, great mere functioning and ***hasituppāda*** impulsions can fall in the continuum of Arahant only. Therefore, (20) kinds of impulsions can fall appropriately in continuum of practising person who is beginner for ***nāmakammatthāna***. 

Further more because (28) kinds of corporealities are also called sensuous ***dhammas*** registering  can  fall  after  sensuous  impulsions  within  five-doors-cognitive  processes  and mind-door-cognitive process which arise by taking object of either any kind or all (28) kinds of  corporealities.  However  only  when  ***atimahantārammaņa***  falls  in  five  fold  cognitive processes  and  ***vibhūtārammaņa***  falls  in  mind-door-cognitive  process  can  registering  fall successively. Therefore it is said as "generally". According to this specification, it should be recognized registering can not fall after impulsions within cognitive process which arise by taking object of concept. 

Then it is explained in ***sammohavinodanī aţţhakathā*** that ……. 

* ***tilakkhaņārammaņika vipassanāya tadārammaņam na labbhati. (Abhi-A-2-147)*** 

After various ***vipassanā*** impulsions, i.e., knowledge of Contemplation on Impermanence, Knowledge  of  Contemplation  on  Suffering,  Knowledge  of  Contemplation  on  Non-self, during arising of ***vipassanā*** impulsion with objects of states of affairs of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, registering is not available. It should be recognized this explanation refers to stage of very powerful ***vipassanā*** practice only. There is evidence of preaching by the Exalted one in which saying that registering can fall after immatured ***vipassanā*** impulsions. 

**PAGE -129** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Paţţhāna-1-133)*** 

***(Paţţhāna-A- Abhi-A- 3- 346)*** 

The essence of above ***Pāli*** Text and commentary is as follows : \_\_ 

Both  fulfilling  Noble  Ones  called  Up-stream  enterer,  Once-returnee,  Non-returnee and  worldly  persons  perform  ***vipassanā***  discerning  on  wholesome  ***dhammas***  (=  mental ***dhammas***,  34,  33  etc.,  within  impulsions  of  wholesome  cognitive  process)  as  ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***.  When  continuity of impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process which is discerning mental ***dhammas*** cease a kind of sensuous consequence consciousness which can perform  function  of  registering  arise  two  times by taking  object  of  wholesome ***dhamma*** which is discerned object of ***vipassanā*** knowledge. 

This  sensuous  consequence  consciousness  can  arise  by  means  of  not  only  pure registering but also ***paţisndhi*** life-continuum, death. It is right. \_\_\_\_ In the continuum of 
PAGE25
PAGE

person with acquired ***paţisndhi*** which takes object of wholesome action consequence mental ***dhamma*** takes object of that wholesome action only. In this case, the Exalted One did not show those ***dhammas*** because those consequence consciousness which can perform functions of ***paţisandhi***, lift-continuum, death are very difficult to be understood. ***(Paţţhāna-1-133, Abhi- A- 3- 436)*** 

**6.B. Very important fact to be noticed \_\_\_\_\_** 

Ways of discerning called ***arūpasattaka*** (non-corporeal septad method) are explained in commentary called ***Visuddhi Magga (Vs-2-261, 262).*** 

It is instructed that succeeding ***vipassanā*** consciousness must discern preceding ***vipassanā*** consciousness again. In other words \_\_\_ preceding ***vipassanā*** impulsions of cognitive process must be discerned by succeeding ***vipassanā*** impulsions of cognitive process again. If it is said especially for worldly persons with three roots \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. discerned  wholesome  deed  is  also  mental  ***dhammas***  of  wholesome  ***vipassanā*** impulsions; and  
1. discerning  wholesome  deed  is  also  mental  ***dhammas***  of  wholesome  ***vipassanā*** impulsions. 

During performing ***vipassanā*** discerning when  it is possible to  give rise to occur consequence called ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death through those ***vipassanā*** impulsions, impulsions adjacent to death also take objects of discerned wholesome ***dhammas*** which are objects of those ***vipassanā*** knowledge. In other words \_\_\_ those impulsions adjacent to death also take object of phenomena of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta*** of discerned wholesome ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE – 130** 

Because ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum-death of new coming-into-existence take object of those impulsions adjacent to death of previous existence those ***dhammas*** take object of that wholesome deed only. It means the exalted one did not show this fact because it is very difficult to be understood. This fact is also an evidence of the fact ***vipassanā*** impulsions can give rise to occur consequence of ***paţisandhi*** and consequence which  occurs during life. **(Please see page 134. etc.,)** 

**6.C. To weigh the pros and cons through logical reasoning** 

While ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas***, such as eye-transparent-element etc, are kept in mind, in other words\_\_\_ while eye-transparent-element together with (10) kinds of ultimate corporeal ***dhammas*** are distinguished by insight the righteous ***meditator*** can see the phenomenon  of  perishing  away  after  arising,  which  is  called  ***anicca***,  of  those  corporeal ***dhammas*** too. Although phenomenon of ***anicca*** of those ultimate nature of real corporeal ***dhammas***  is  seen  by  insight  during  taking  object  of  ultimate  nature  of  real  corporeal ***dhammas*** it is possible to fall registering. It is because those ultimate nature of real corporeal ***dhammas*** are also called sensuous ***dhammas***. Similarly while mental ***dhammas*** of mind- door-cognitive process which are knowing phenomenon of ***anicca*** of eye-transparent-element are distinguished and kept in mind it is possible to fall registering after impulsions. Therefore the  explanation  that  “after  immatured  ***vipassanā***  impulsions  registering  is  available”,  is noticeable explanation really. If one rejects such explanation that “after sensuous implusions which arise by taking object of real sensuous ***dhammas***, such as eye-transparent-element, 
PAGE

registering  is  available”,  will  be  meaningless.  It  is  because  it  is  inevitable  phenomena between the seeing on the ultimate nature of eye-transparent-element and the seeing on the phenomenon of perishing after arising which is called ***anicca*** of eye-transparent-element. When one sees up to the field of ultimate nature by insight, compactness has been broken down. Only when compactness is broken down can the insight reach to the field of ultimate nature. When one reaches to the field of ultimate nature by insight characteristic of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta*** become appear apparently in the insight of ***meditator*** as they really are. 

* ***nānādhātuyo  vinibbhujitvā  ghanavinibbhuge  kate  anattalakkhaņam  yāthāvasarasato upaţţhāti. (Abhi-A-2-47)*** 

As it is possible to fall registering after immattureed ***vipassanā*** impulsions which are knowing phenomena of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta*** of eye-transparent-element it is possible to fall registering after impulsions which are knowing nature of loathsomeness called ***asubha*** of the eye-transparent-element. It is not taking object of concept of foul body of corpse but loathsome nature of ultimate nature of real corporeal ***dhammas***, eye-transparent-element etc., within same corporeal unit. Although it is possible to fall registering after impulsions of mind-door-cognitive  process  which  arise  by  taking  object  of  corporeal  ***dhammas***  called ***dhamma***-object,  eye-transparent-element  etc.,  it  must  be  obvious  object  call ***vibhūtārammaņa***. 

**PAGE-131** 

Furthermore  after  great  wholesome  impulsions,  great  consequence  and  rootless investigating  registerings  with  either  joyful  feeling  or  neutrality  feeling,  can  fall appropriately. After unwholesome impulsions great consequence and rootless investigating registerings with either joyful feeling or neutrality feeling, can fall appropriately. In this work generally  only  one  example  is  shown  in  tables  as  priority.  The  righteous  ***meditator***  can understand remaining ways of discerning on registering for some sections gradually during discerning on registerings. Depending on general rules \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. after joyful impulsions, joyful registering;  
1. after neutral impulsions and impulsions with disagreeable feeling, neutral registering; 
1. after unwholesome impulsions, rootless registering, 

are shown in tables respectively. 

However after wholesome impulsions, rootless consequence registering can also fall appropriately. After unwholesome impulsions great consequence registering can fall. 

Those  (8)  kinds  of  great  consequence  consciousness  and  (3)  kinds  of  rootless investigating consciousness, total in (11) kinds of consciousness can perform function of registering. In this place a table showing probability of registering after various impulsions for  worldly  person  with  three  roots  would  be  presented  as  follows.  Noble  Ones  called Upstream-enterer, Once-returnee, Non-returnee can recognize in similar way after removing defilements which had been eradicated by themselves. 

Table showing probability of registerings for worldly persons with three roots 



|After any kind of great wholesome impulsions …….  (8) kinds |any  of  (11)  kinds  of registerings can fall. |
| :- | :- |
|<p>After any kind of impulsions </p><p>rooted in greed …….  (8) kinds </p>|any  of  (11)  kinds  of registerings can fall. |
|<p>After any kind of impulsions </p><p>rooted in anger …….  (2) kinds </p>|any of (6) kinds of neutral registerings can fall. |
|<p>After any kind of impulsions </p><p>rooted in delusion …….  (2) kinds </p>|any of (11) kinds of  registerings can fall. |


**6.D Regularity of consequence – irregularity of impulsions \_\_\_\_** 

1. Natural desirable object and natural extremely desirable object can be encountered through previous action only. Therefore only wholesome consequence registerings are available. 

Among  those  when  middle  natural  desirable  object  called  ***iţţhamajjhatta***  is encountered consciousness of cognitive process, excluding adverting and impulsions, can be  only  great  consequence  consciousness  and  rootless  wholesome  consequence consciousness  which  are  result  of  previous  wholesome  action.  It  means  those consciousness  are  five  fold  consciousness,  receiving,  investigating  and  registering consequence  consciousness.  If  wise  attention  arises  by  taking  object,  wholesome impulsions will fall; if unwise attention arises by taking object, unwholesome impulsion will fall. 

**PAGE -132** 

2. When  natural  extremely  desirable  object,  such  as  the  Exalted  One  etc.,  are encountered it is available through previous action, resulting in probability to fall (5) kinds of joyful registerings, i.e, (4) kinds of great consequence joyful registerings and one kind of rootless wholesome consequence joyful investigating registering. If wise attention arises by taking object, wholesome impulsions will fall; if unwise attention arises by taking object, unwholesome impulsion will fall. Five fold consciousness, receiving and investigating consciousness must also occur wholesome consequence only. 
2. Because  natural  undesirable  objects  are  also  encountered  through  only  previous unwholesome action, when one encounters with that undesirable object, if wise attention arises,  wholesome  impulsions  will  fall;  if  unwise  attention  arises,  unwholesome impulsions  will  fall  and  fivefold  consciousness,  receiving,  investigating,  registering consciousness  must  occur  rootless  unwholesome  consequence  consciousness  only. According to this specification, it should be recognized after impulsions of fivefold doors and mind-door-cognitive processes which arise by taking undesirable object it is possible to  fall  one  kind  of  registering  called  unwholesome  consequence  neutral  investigating registering consciousness only. 

**6.E Section of action (*kamma*) and consequence of action** 

In this place, these (4) kinds of actions \_\_\_\_ 

1. ***tihetuka ukkaţţha kusala*** (superior wholesome action with three roots) 
1. ***tihetuka omoka kusala*** (inferior wholesome action with three roots) 
1. ***dvihetuka ukkaţţha kusala*** (superior wholesome action with three roots)  
1. ***dvihetuka omoka kusala*** (inferior wholesome action with three roots) 

and consequences of those wholesome actions ought to be understood, resulting in clear understanding on way of discerning on registerings. 
Vol 2, pg 101-153.doc 

***Pāli* *Quotation* (*Abhidhammatthasangaha* section of *vīthimutta*)** Table showing wholesome action and consequence of action 

|Wholesome action |***Samānavāda*** Consequence |***kecivāda*** consequence |
| - | - | :- |
|***tihetuka-ukkaţţha***                       unprompted (superior with three roots)            prompted |16 |12 |
|***tihetuka-omaka***                          unprompted (Inferior with three roots) ***dvihetuka-ukkaţţha***                       prompted (superior with two roots) |12 |10 |
|***dvihetuka-omaka***                       unprompted (Inferior with two roots)                prompted |8 |8 |
\1. Superior wholesome action with three roots 

During performing wholesome actions both such kind of wholesome action which is predominated with the right view knowledge on action and consequence of action called ***kammassakatā  sammādiţţhiñāņa***,  which  is  associated  with  firm  faith  on  action  and consequence  of  action  and  some  kinds  of  wholesome  actions,  such  as  charity,  morality, practice, which are surrounded by  knowledge of contemplation on ***anicca***, knowledge of contemplation on ***dukkha***, knowledge of contemplation on ***anatta***, due to ability to perform ***vipassanā*** discerning on ultimate ***dhammas*** of corporeality-mentality, are wholesome action with three roots because those actions are associating with three roots called greedlessness, hatelessness,  non-delusion  which  are  real  fundamental  of  every  wholesome  action.  Great wholesome ***vipassanā*** impulsions associated with knowledge are real wholesome action with three roots. 

During performing that kind of wholesome action, if those actions are not surrounding with unwholesome ***dhammas***, greed, anger, conceit etc., but greedlessness, hatelessness, non- delusion, those wholesome actions can be said superior kind of wholesome action (***ukkhaţţha kusala***). If one always enjoys whenever recollecting those wholesome actions it becomes the most  excellent  kind  of  wholesome  action.  The  basic  meaning  is  great  wholesome consciousness associated with knowledge or group of consciousness and mental concomitants which  are  associated  with  great  wholesome  action  and  knowledge,  called ***puññābhisańkhāra***. If it is associated with agreeable feeling, those are (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas***; if it is associated with neutrality feeling, those are (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas***. It should be recognized as generally. 

How it produces consequence \_\_\_\_ That superior kind of great wholesome action with  three  roots  give  rise  to  occur  ***paţisandhi***  with  three  roots  called  great  consequence consciousness associated with knowledge during ***paţisandhi***. During life it produces (16) kinds of consequences  called  great consequence and rootless wholesome  consequence.  If ***paţisandhi*** consciousness associates with agreeable feeling, numbers of mental ***dhammas*** are (34), while if it associates with neutrality feeling, that of mental ***dhammas*** are (33), due to lack of pleasurable interest (***pīti***). 

**PAGE-134** 

**6.E.2 How volitions of *vipassanā* impulsions can produce *paţisandhi* consequence** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Sam-1-295 Cetanā Sutta)*** 

` `***(Sam-A-2-66) (two paragraph)  (Sam- ţī-2-83)***  

The essence of above ***Pāli*** Text, commentary and sub-commentary is as follows. \_\_\_ 

A practising person performs ***vipassanā*** discerning continuously through generalizing on conditioned things occurring in three realms called sensuous sphere, fine-material sphere and immaterial sphere as ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***. He is knowing and seeing on faults of impermanence, faults of suffering, faults of non-self, faults of ability to change and alteration by eye of wisdom clearly. In the continuum of that righteous ***meditator*** with incessant arising of ***vipassanā*** knowledge in that time \_\_\_\_ 

1. it is impossible to arise wholesome action and unwholesome action, which can produce new coming-into-existence, which can cycle rounds of rebirth; 
1. there is no consideration with craving and wrong view as "may I become superior kind of human being, heavenly being" etc., 
1. however, underlying tendency called ***anusaya dhātu*** always deposits in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of that righteous ***meditator***, due to un accomplishment to remove underlying tendency element completely through the Noble-Path ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-135** 

Although he is lacking of endeavouring wholesome and unwholesome actions which can produce new coming-into-existence, due to walking straight forward to ***nibbāna*** which is extinguishment of all existences along with the course of factors of Path; although he is lacking of considerations with craving and wrong view so as to become superior kind of human  being,  heavenly  being  etc;  embedding  of  underlying  tendency  element  is  causal ***dhamma***  for  arising  of  action-consciousness  (***kamma***  ***viññāņa***)  which  is  capable  of producing  new  coming-into-existence  again  in  future  because  the  underlying  tendency element is embedding in the continuum of that practising person who is penetrative knowing and seeing on danger of all existences in three realms, resulting in ability to ***paţisandhi*** consequence by volitions which are associating with ***vipassanā*** impulsions. It means due to existing  of  underlying  tendency  element  within  continuity  of  consequence  corporeality- mentality  of  that  practising  person,  the  consciousness  which  associates  with  ***vipassanā*** knowledge is existing as status of action consciousness (***kamma*** ***viññāņa***) which can produce new coming-into-existence again in future. According to these explanations, translation of ***Cetanā*** ***Sutta*** is as follows : \_\_\_\_\_ 

***Bhikkhus*** … although such wholesome volition, unwholesome volition which can produce new coming-into-existence are not also performed intentionally; although there is no considerations with craving wrong view so as to become superior  kind of human being, heavenly being  etc.,  if  the  underlying  tendency  element  is  still  existing,  embedding,  this embedding of underlying tendency element will be causal ***dhamma*** for arising of action- consciousness called ***kammaviññāņa*** which has got efficiency to produce new coming-into- existence again in future. If there is causal ***dhamma*** called underlying tendency element, there will be obvious occurrence of arising of action consciousness called ***kammaviññāņa*** which  has  got  efficiency  to  produce  new  coming-into-existence  again.  It  that  action- consciousness becomes flourish, the arising of coming-into-existence called new coming- into-existence again in future will be resulted. If it is apparent arising of new coming-into- existence again in future, \_\_\_\_\_ 

1) ***jāti***   =  taking ***paţisandhi***, 
1) ***jarā***  =  ageing, 
1) ***maraņa***    =  death, 
1) ***soka***  =  sorrow, 
1) ***parideva***  =  lamentation, 
1) ***dukkha***  =  bodily suffering, 
1) ***domanassa***  =  mentally disagreeable feeling 
1) ***upāyāsa***  =  grief and despair, 

will arise apparently in future. Thus all kinds of masses of suffering arise.  ***(Sam-1-295)*** 

This preaching is an evidence of how volitions of ***vipassanā*** impulsions can produce ***paţisandhi*** consequence and consequences during life in the continuum of righteous person with  defilement  of  underlying  tendency  element,  if opportunity  is  available.  Volitions  of ***vipassanā***  impulsions  associated  with  knowledge  produces  the  great  consequence consciousness of ***paţisandhi*** with knowledge during ***paţisandhi*** and it produces (16) kinds of consequences mention ed above during life. It should be recognized volitions of ***vipassanā*** impulsions  which  do  not  associate  with  knowledge  can  produce  ***paţisandhi***  and  ***pavatti*** (during life) consequences shown in ***dvihetuka ukkaţţha kusala*** section. Those volitions of ***vipassanā*** impulsions which can produce ***paţisandhi*** and ***pavatti*** consequences are inclusive in  seed  of  practice  (***caraņa***)  while  those  ***vipassanā***  impulsions  which  can  not  produce consequence in that way are inclusive in seed of knowledge (***vijjā***). 

***Pāli Quotation (Paţisam -60) (Paţisam-A-1-250)*** 

How does similarity arise in the phenomenon of directing of the mind of meditation towards ***sańkhārupekkhā*** for both worldly person and fulfilling persons called upstream- enterer and Once returnee who lack absorption? 

1. For  **the  worldly  person**  who  is  pleased  with  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards Formations  (***sańkhārupekkhā  ñāņa***)  the  mind  of  meditation  is  faded;  it  is  danger  of practice; it is danger of attainment of ***sacca paţivedha ñāņa*** called **penetrative knowing and  seeing  on  four  Noble  Truth**,  which  is  deserving  to  attain  through  ***vipassanā*** practice;  it  is  the  origin  of  sensuous  joyful  ***paţisandhi***  which  will  arise  in  future. (***Paţisam-60***) 

Due  to  presence  of  powerful  efficiency  of  volitional  action  associated  with  the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations, if that action give rise to occur joyful ***paţisandhi*** consequence, defilement called greed which is said as heartfelt attachment on the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations, is supporting causal ***dhamma*** for sensuous joyful ***paţisandhi*** in future. 

The wholesome action of ***sańkhārupekkhā*** which has got association of defile called greed  which  is  heartfelt  attachment  on  the  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards Formations,  can  produce  consequence  round  (***vipāka  vatta***).  The  Knowledge  of Neutrality Towards Formation is, Therefore, definite cause (***janaka paccaya***) while defilement called greed which is heartfelt attachment on that knowledge, is supporting cause (***upatthambhaka paccaya***). (Paţisam***-A-1-250***) 

2. For fulfilling persons called upstream enterer and Once-returnee who lack absorption who are pleased with knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations (***sańkhārupekkhā ñāņa***)  the  mind  of  meditation  is  faded;  it  is  danger  of  practice;  it  is  danger  of attainment of ***sacca paţivedha ñāņa*** called successive kinds of upper Path-knowledge which are capable of penetrative knowing and seeing on four Noble Truth, which is deserving to attain through ***vipassanā*** practice; it is the origin of sensuous joyful ***paţisandhi*** which will arise in future. (***Paţisam -60***) 

**PAGE-137** 

Among  fulfilling  persons,  for  upstream-enterer  and  Once-returnee  who  lack absorption, if action of ***sańkhārupekkhā*** produce sensuous joyful ***paţisamdhi*** consequence, the defilement called greed which is heartfelt attachment on that knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations is supporting cause for that action of ***sańkhārupekkhā***. The action of ***sańkhārupekkhā***  is  definite  cause  called  ***janaka  paccaya***.  For  those  persons  called  both Upstream-enterer, Once-returnee who have got absorption and Non-returnee, due to presence of efficiency to exit in brahma world only, the defilement called greed which is heartfelt attachment on that knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formation, can not occur as supporting cause  of  lofty  absorption  of  wholesome  action  which  is  definite  action  (***janaka  kamma***) which can produce brahma’s ***paţisandhi*** directly. (It is because only the attachment, called ***taņhā***  which  is  heartfelt  desire  on  both  lofty  absorption  and  brahma’s  life  is  supporting  cause.) It should be understood the fact while the knowledge of Adaptation (***anuloma ñāņa***) and the knowledge of Trans-lineage give rise to occur sensuous joyful ***paţisandhi*** only that defilement called attachment on those ***vipassanā*** knowledge are supporting causes. (***Paţisam- A-1-250***) 

Thus similarity in nature of capable of attaching, pleasing with mind of meditation which is directing towards ***sańkhārupekkhā*** occurs for worldly person and fulfilling persons. (***Paţisam-60***) 

These kinds of ***vipassanā*** actions are superior kinds of sensuous actions with three roots, which have got efficiency to produce the highest sensual existences. 

**6.F Inferior kind of wholesome action with three roots (*tihetuka omaka kusala*)** 

If unwholesome ***dhammas***, such as selfish desire, anger, conceit, envy, stinginess etc, are surrounding three periods, before, during and after cultivation of  wholesome actions, those wholesome actions become inferior kinds, resulting in designation as ***tihetuka omaka*** (inferior kind with three roots). 

**6.G Superior kind of wholesome action with two roots *(dvihetuka ukkhattha kusala)*** 

During cultivating wholesome actions, if one does without association of knowledge, as children do, it associates with only two roots, greedlessness, hatelessness, but not non- delusion, that kind of wholesome action is wholesome action with two roots. If wholesome ***dhammas*** are surrounding at the period before and after that wholesome action, it is superior kind of wholesome action with two roots. The basic meaning is group of mental ***dhammas*** of great wholesome action which are not associated with knowledge. 

How  it  produces  consequences\_\_\_\_\_  During  ***paţisandhi***  these  inferior  kind  of wholesome action with three roots and superior kind of wholesome action with two roots give rise  to  occur  ***paţisandhi***  with  two  roots  called  great  consequence  consciousness  without knowledge. During life, however, it can not produce great consequence consciousness with three roots which associates with knowledge but (12) kinds of consequences called (4) kinds of  great  consequence  consciousness  without  knowledge  and  (8)  kinds  of  wholesome consequences. 

**PAGE -138** 

**6.H. Inferior kind of wholesome action with two roots *(dvihetuka omaka kusala)*** 

During cultivating wholesome action with two roots, if unwholesome ***dhammas*** are surrounding the period before and after that wholesome action, it reaches to inferior kind, resulting in designating as "***dvihetuka omaka***" (inferior kind with two roots).  

How  it  produces  consequences\_\_\_\_\_  During  ***paţisandhi***  that  inferior  kind  of wholesome  action  with  two  roots  gives  rise  to  occur  inferior  ***paţisandhi***  called  rootless wholesome consequence neutral investigating consciousness. Due to associating with (10) kinds of both sides mental concomitants, excluding ***chanda***, ***pīti***, ***viriya***, that ***paţisandhi*** mind moment consists of (11) mental ***dhammas***. Those ***paţisandhi*** of congenital blind person and congenital  disable  persons  without  hand  or  foot  etc.,  are  consisting  of  that  rootless wholesome  consequence  neutral  investigating  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness.  The  ***paţisandhi*** consciousness  of  ***vinipātika  asurā***  is  also  that  rootless  wholesome  consequence  neutral investigating  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  too.  During  life,  it  can  bring  forth  (8)  kinds  of rootless  wholesome  consequences  only.  These  explanations  mentioned  above  are  called ***samānavāda*** (=agreed by all teachers). Those ***Mahā Theras*** such as ***Mahādatta*** ***Thero*** etc, who  dwelled  in  ***Moravapi***,  who  were  known  as  ***keci***  teachers  or  ***kecivāda***,  however, considered that \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. unprompted wholesome action can not bring forth prompted consequence and  
1. prompted wholesome action can not bring forth unprompted consequence. 

If it is counted in this view, numbers of consequence will be as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

1) ***dvādasa*** (twelve) \_\_\_ If superior kind of wholesome action with three roots might be (2) kinds of unprompted great wholesome action with knowledge, A\_\_\_\_\_ 
1) rootless wholesome consequence  …..  (8) kinds 
1) great wholesome unprompted  …..  (4) kinds 

in total           (12)  kinds 

of these consequences will be resulted. 

Then if superior kind of wholesome action with three roots might be (2) kinds of prompted great wholesome action with knowledge 

1) rootless wholesome consequence  …..  (8) kinds, 
1) great wholesome prompted …..   (4) kinds, 

in total           (12) kinds 

of these consequences will be resulted. 

(Due to lack of prompted or unprompted for rootless consequence, it is available in both sides.) 

2) ***dasa*** (ten) \_\_\_ If inferior kind of wholesome action with three roots and superior kind of wholesome action with two roots might be unprompted ones \_\_\_\_\_ 
1) rootless wholesome consequence  …..  (8) kinds 
1) great wholesome consciousness without knowledge, unprompted …..  (2) kinds 

in total           (10) kinds 

of these consequences will be resulted. 

If inferior kind of wholesome action with three roots and superior kind of wholesome action with two roots might be prompted ones 

1) rootless wholesome consequence …..  (8) kinds, 
1) great wholesome consciousness without knowledge prompted …..  (2) kinds, in total           (10) kinds 

of these consequences will be resulted. **PAGE-139** 

3) ***aţţha*** (eight) \_\_\_\_ Both kinds of unprompted and prompted inferior kind of wholesome actions with two roots can bring forth (8) kinds of rootless wholesome consequences only. (***Abhidhammasangaha***) 

Purpose of explanation \_\_\_\_\_ 

The purpose of explanation on above wholesome actions and consequence of action in the  aspect  of  mankind  as  priority  is  firstly  during  discerning  on  principle  of  dependent- origination it is essential to be understood action and consequence of action systematically. Second, it is intended to be able to keep registering consciousness in mind accurately in this section  of  ***nāmakammaţţhāna***.  Those  investigating  consciousness  and  great  wholesome consequence consciousness which are inclusive in side of sequence of action are kinds of consciousness which can perform function of registering. (**Please see in detailed in** ***Abhi-A- 1-307,327***) 

**6.I. How object and consequence are specified** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Abhidhammatthasangaha***) 

Probability to become either wholesome consequence or unwholesome consequence and  probability  of  association  with  either  joyful  feeling  or  neutrality  feeling  of  all consequence consciousness within cognitive process, from fivefold consciousness, seeing- consciousness etc., as beginning until registering consciousness as end, are relating to kinds of objects, i.e., (1) desirable-object, (2) very desirable object (3) undesirable-object. Those kinds of desirable or very desirable or undesirable objects must be specified according to wish of middle kind of human beings. **(See in detailed in *Abhi-A-2-10* etc.)** 

In accordance with wish of middle kind of human beings (6) kinds of good objects, colour, sound etc., are desirable-objects. The appearance and sound of the Exalted One who is very difficult to be encountered and very handsome man and very pretty girl are very desirable objects. Faeces, urine, corpse etc, and bad objects of colour, sound, odour, taste, touch etc., are undesirable-objects. 

Because natural undesirable-object can be uncounted through previous unwholesome action only, only unwholesome consequence fivefold consciousness, receiving, investigating, registering  consciousness  arise  in  those  consciousness  of  cognitive  process  which  take undesirable-object. 

Because  natural  desirable-object  can  be  uncounted  through  previous  wholesome action only, only wholesome consequence fivefold consciousness, receiving, investigating, registering  consciousness  arise  in  those  consciousness  of  cognitive  process  which  take undesirable-object. Great consequence consciousness are also included in registering. 

**PAGE-140** 

Because natural very desirable-objects can be encountered through taking along with the efficiency  of  previous  perfections  (***pāramita***),  when  natural  very  desirable-objects  are encountered (wholesome consequence fivefold consciousness, receiving) joyful investigating, joyful  registering  consciousness  only  arise.  (Rootless  wholesome  consequence  joyful investigating  registering  and  great  consequence  joyful  registering  fall  as  registering consciousness.) 

**6.J How impulsion and registering are specified** 

* ***yam pana "javanena tadārammaņam niyametabba" nti vuttam. Tan kusalam sandhāya vuttanti veditabbam. (Abhi-A-1-317)*** 
- Those words, "registering should be specified by impulsion", (***Abhi-A-1-309***), are 

said  in  section  of ***hetukittanakathā***.  It   should be  recognized  those  words  are  said  with referring to wholesome impulsion. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Abhidhammatta sangaha***) 

- Disagreeable feeling  feels taste of object through unpleasing, agreeable feeling, 

however, feels taste of object through pleasing. Therefore disagreeable feeling and agreeable feeling are not conform with each other in sequence. Neutrality feeling, however, feels taste of object moderately, resulting in conformity with both kinds of disagreeable and agreeable feelings  in  sequence.  Therefore  either  registering  or  life-continuum  must  associate  with neutrality feeling after impulsions with disagreeable feeling. 

Unless it is possible to fall registering after impulsions which associate with anger in the continuum of a person who has got ***paţisandhi*** with great consequence consciousness with agreeable feeling, in the aspect of fixed law of mind, the life-continuum must fall after impulsions which associate with anger. If life-continuum falls, it might be life-continuum with agreeable feeling because he has got ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling originally and then those ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum and death-consciousness within one life are the same as each other. That life-continuum with agreeable feeling does not conform with impulsions which  associate  with  anger.  "While  difficulty  is  encountered  in  this  way,  investigating consciousness  with  neutrality  feeling,  which  takes  any  sensual  object  (of  corporeality- mentality) which was experienced in previous period, arise so as not to cease continuity of mind but availability to connection between impulsions with anger and life-continuum with agreeable feeling", said by noble teachers. (***Abhidhammattha sangaha***) 

**PAGE -141** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Abhi-A-1-317,318)*** 

After  falling  of  impulsions  which  associate  with  agreeable  feeling,  (5)  kinds  of registering  with  agreeable  feeling  i.e,  (4)  kinds  of  great  consequence  registering  with agreeable feeling and one kind of rootless wholesome consequence investigating registering with agreeable feeling, are worth searching to fall. Among those (5) kinds of registering with agreeable feeling, any one will fall after impulsions which associate with agreeable feeling. After falling of impulsions which associate with neutrality feeling, (6) kinds of registering with neutrality feeling i.e, (4) kinds of great consequence registering with neutrality feeling and (2) kinds of rootless wholesome consequence investigating with neutrality feeling and rootless wholesome consequence investigating with neutrality feeling, are worth searching to fall. Among those (6) kinds of registering  with neutrality  feeling, any  one will fall after impulsions which associate with neutrality feeling. This is the opinion of ***Mahādhamma*** ***rakkhita Mahā Thero***. 

During  searching  in  that  way  \_\_\_  for  instance  \_\_\_  a  virtuous  person  has  got ***paţisandhi***  with  agreeable  feeling.  He  endeavoured  so  as  to  attain  absorptions.  One  day acquired absorption is fallen back, due to suppression by forgetfulness: When he bears in mind that "my supreme absorption ***dhammas*** has been lost …" impulsion which associate with  anger  arise  through  unpleasingness  in  the  continuum  of  that  virtuous  person.  It  is reasonable question that at that time which kind of registering falls after those impulsions which associate with anger. 

The Exalted One rejected these phenomena, viz., 

1. arising of disagreeable feeling contiguous after agreeable feeling and  
1. arising  of  agreeable  feeling  contiguous  after  disagreeable  feeling  in  the  ***Paţţhāna*** (***Paţţhāna-1-312***) 

The Exalted one rejected the phenomenon that if impulsions fall by taking object of lofty ***dhamma***, the registering falls after that kind of impulsion, in that ***Pāli***  

Text of ***Paţţhāna*** too. 

Therefore  it  should be  answered  that  after  those  impulsions  which  associate  with anger investigating consciousness with neutrality feeling called rootless mind-consciousness- element with neutrality feeling (***upekkhāsahagata ahetuka manoviññāņadhātu***), which may be  either  wholesome  consequence  or  unwholesome  consequence  will  fall.  (***Abhi-A-1- 317,318***) 

In  this  case,  because  guest  life-continuum  falls  by  taking  sensuous  object  (of corporeality-mentality)  which  has  been  experienced  previously,  if  it  is  desirable  object, rootless wholesome consequence investigating registering with neutrality feeling will fall; if it  is  undesirable  object,  rootless  unwholesome  consequence  investigating  registering  with neutrality feeling will fall respectively. It should be recognized in this way. 

**6.K Sessions (*vāra*) without availability to fall registering** 

1. If impulsions which associate with anger fall by taking any object of three kinds, i.e, very desirable object, such as the appearance of the Exalted One etc-; the object with very long life span called ***atimahantārammaņa***, which has got life span of (17) mind moments completely; obvious object called ***vibhūtārammaņa*** in the mind-door in the continuum of heretic who has got ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling; or if dreadful impulsions which associate with anger fall by taking object with very long life span, obvious object, such as female heavenly being who is very desirable object in the continuum of person who has got ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling; after those kinds of impulsions registerings are impossible to fall. 

**PAGE-142** 

Because the object is very desirable object, if registerings fall, it must associate with agreeable  feeling.  That  registering  with  agreeable  feeling  is  not  deserving  to  fall  after impulsions which associate with anger. Those registerings with neutrality feeling are also not conformed  with  very  desirable  object,  due  to  presence  of  explanation  that  registering consequence  consciousness  with  agreeable  feeling  only  can  fall by  taking  very  desirable object (***atiiţţhe panasomanassasahagatāneva.***) 

2. If object of long life span strikes in fivefold doors, unobvious object strikes in the mind- door in the continuum of person who has got ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling and if impulsions  which  associate  with  anger  fall  by  taking  that  object,  after  that  kind  of impulsions registering is not worth falling. It is because only when the object with very long  life  span  and  obvious  object  fall  in  fivefold  doors  and  mind-door  respectively registering is available. 
3. In  the  continuum  of  a  person  who  has  got  ***paţisandhi***  with  agreeable  feeling  when impulsions which associate with anger fall by taking object of fallen acquired absorption back in such way that "my supreme absorption ***dhammas*** has been lost" registering is not available. It is because only when three factors i.e, sensuous impulsions, sensuous being, sensuous object, are completed, registering is available. 
3. In the continuum of a person who has got ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling if impulsions which  associate  with  anger  fall  by  taking  any  object  of  concepts,  registering  is  not available through taking object of that concept. It is because registering consciousness takes object of only sensuous ***dhammas*** (=sensual corporeality-mentality) but not object of concepts. 

In these (4) kinds of sessions of impulsions without availability to fall registering life- continuum with agreeable feeling which is similar to ***paţisandhi***, is also not available because it is contiguous after impulsions which associate with anger. 

When it is encountered with difficulty, due to neither registering nor life-continuum is available  investigating  consciousness  with  neutrality  feeling  arise  through  performing function of guest life-continuum (***āgantukabhavarga***) so as to connect continuity of mind between impulsions which associate with anger and life-continuum with agreeable feeling (of a  person  who  has  got  ***paţsandhi***  with  agreeable  feeling).  Because  if  this  investigating consciousness does not arise after impulsions which associate with anger, continuity of mind will  be  ceased,  resulting  in  termination  of  life,  those  investigating  consciousness  with neutrality feeling have to arise for performing function of life-continuum, so as not to cease life  but  occurring  as  factor  of  a  life  according  to  explanation  that  ***bhavassa  angam bhavangam***. 

Guest life-continuum \_\_\_\_ life-continuum consciousness which are occurring at intervals of consciousness of cognitive processes are identical with ***paţsandhi*** consciousness. Therefore those kinds of life-continuums are called ***āvāsikabhavanga*** (host life-continuum) which exist at the beginning of house of body. This investigating consciousness with neutrality feeling, however, is called  guest life-continuum because it arises sometimes, during encountering with difficulty. 

**PAGE-143** 

**6.L. Opinion of the Most Venerable *Ledi Sayadaw* *Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Abhi***-***A-1-326,327)*** 

- In such time unwholesome impulsions fall at the interval of wholesome impulsions. 

At  that  time  great  consequence  registering  with  roots  should  be  fallen  at  the  end  of unwholesome impulsions so as to be same as the custom which has been practiced frequently at the end of wholesome impulsions (in the continuum of a person who always practices wholesome deeds frequently). 

In such time only unwholesome impulsions fall continuously. At that time registering without root cause should be fallen at the end of that unwholesome impulsions. (***Abhi-A-326, 327***) 

With referring to these explanations found in commentary the Most Venerable ***Ledi Sayadaw*** said in ***Paramattha dīpanī*** as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

If  great  consequence  consciousness  with  neutrality  feeling  arises  frequently  and originally, it ought not to be said that those great consequence consciousness with neutrality are also unable to arise by performing function of life-continuum. In the commentary also it is explained that great  consequence registering with roots should be fallen at the end of unwholesome impulsions so as to be same as the custom which has been practiced frequently at  the  end  of  wholesome  impulsions.  In  accordance  with  this  explanation  found  in commentary,  if  consequence  registering  with  root  cause  can  fall  after  unwholesome impulsions, the guest life-continuum which falls on behalf of registering ought to be great consequence life-continuum with root cause. Therefore these (6) kinds of consciousness, viz., 

1) great consequence with neutrality feeling -  (4) kinds 
1) rootless investigating with neutrality feeling -  (2) kinds 

`   `in total      = (6) kinds 

are possible to fall by performing function of guest life-continuum. 

**6.M. In desirable object-registering after impulsions with scepsis and restlessness rooted** 

**in delusion** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Abhi-A-1-317***) 

The way of arising of registering after impulsions rooted in delusion is as follows\_\_\_ 

There is a question that \_\_\_ which kind of registering can arise in the continuums of both the person with skeptical doubt on desirable-object and the person with restlessness. Whether skeptical doubt arises on desirable object or not, whether restlessness arises or not, rootless wholesome consequence rootless consciousness with agreeable feeling only arises by performing  function  of  registering.  It  should  be  answered  that  rootless  wholesome consequence  consciousness  with  neutrality  arises  on  the  moderate  desirable  object  by performing function of registering. (***Abhi***-A-1-317) 

**PAGE-144** 

This is the opinion of ***Mahādhammarakkhita Maha Thero***. In the aspect of opinion agreed with all teachers \_\_\_\_\_ rootless unwholesome consequence investigating registering with neutrality feeling is available on the undesirable object; (2) kinds of rootless wholesome consequence  registering  and  (8)  kinds  of  great  consequence  are  available  on  moderate desirable object; rootless wholesome consequence investigating registering with agreeable feeling and (4) kinds of great wholesome consequence registering with agreeable feeling are available on very desirable object appropriately. (***Abhidhammatthasangaha***) 

**N. The *dhamma* which specifies to occur either wholesome or unwholesome action *Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Abhi-A-1-317***) 

- This phenomenon is not suitable one that if the adverting consciousness brings forth 

cessation of life-continuum through wise attention (=proper way of taking object into heart, which  is  factor  of  prosperity);  if  determining  consciousness  distinguishes  and  keeps  the object in mind through wise attention (= proper way of taking object into heart, which is factor of prosperity) impulsions will be unwholesome ones. 

This phenomenon is also not suitable one that if the adverting consciousness brings forth cessation of life-continuum through unwise attention (=wrong way of taking object into heart, which is not factor of prosperity); if determining consciousness distinguishes and keeps the object in mind through unwise attention (= wrong way of taking object into heart, which is not factor of prosperity), impulsions will be wholesome ones. 

If both kinds of adverting and determining consciousness bring forth cessation of life- continuum and keep object in mind through wise attention, impulsions are wholesome ones. 

If both kinds of adverting and determining consciousness bring forth cessation of life- continuum and keep object in mind through unwise attention, impulsions are unwholesome ones. It should be understood in this way. (***Abhi-A-1-317***) 

Either the way of taking into heart on conditioned things, which  are  real ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***a-subha***, as ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, ***a-subha*** or the way of taking into heart as corporeal ***dhammas***, mental ***dhammas***, causal ***dhammas***, resultant ***dhammas*** is called wise attention through factor of attainment of prosperity, the Noble Path, Fruit, ***nibbāna***, etc. Unwise attention should be understood in turn. 

**PAGE-145** 

**6.O. Three roots – two roots – rootless *Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Abhi***-***A-1-327***) 

According to above specification of the commentary \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. after impulsions with three roots registering with three roots; 
1. after impulsions with two roots registering with two roots; 
1. after rootless impulsion (***hasituppāda*** impulsions) rootless registering consciousness can fall respectively. 

It should be recognized as generally 

According to above explanations relating to registering consciousness if it is pondered as a whole, feelings of investigating, impulsions, and registering consciousness are the same as each other generally. 

1. If  impulsions  associate  with  agreeable  feeling,  investigating  and  registering consciousness also associate with agreeable feeling frequently. 
1. If  impulsions  associate  with  neutrality  feeling,  investigating  and  registering consciousness also associate with neutrality feeling frequently. 
1. If impulsions associate with three roots, registering consciousness also associate with three roots frequently. 
1. If impulsions associate with two roots, registering consciousness also associate with two roots frequently. 

Therefore with regarding to general rules, impulsions and registering are shown as three roots, two roots, agreeable feeling, neutrality feeling as priority in tables. It should be recognized exact specification as shown in above explanations. 

**6.P.  The  reason  why  registering  does  not  fall  after  sensuous  *dhammas*  which  take** 

**objects of lofty and Supramundane *dhammas*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-147)*** 

1. All kinds of sensuous consequence consciousness have object of sensuous ***dhammas*** only  (***parittārammaņa***);  they  take  objects  of  only  corporeal  ***dhammas***,  mental ***dhammas*** called sensuous ***dhammas***. 
1. Mere functioning-mind-element (***kiriya manodhātu***) called five-door-adverting which is capable of adverting five kinds of objects, visible-object etc., which strike on each 

(5) kinds, eye-door etc., respectively, has got sensuous ***dhammas*** only; it takes objects of only corporeal ***dhammas***, mental ***dhammas*** called sensuous ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-146** 

3. Rootless mere functioning mind-consciousness-element with agreeable feeling, which is called ***hasituppāda***, which is a kind of joyful consciousness occurring in continuum of Arahant only, has also got object of sensuous ***dhammas*** (***parittārammaņa***) only, it takes object of only corporeal ***dhamma***, mental ***dhammas*** called sensuous ***dhammas***. 

Thus the Exatted One preached that every sensuous consequence consciousness, five- door-adverting  and  ***hasituppāda***  consciousness  take  objects  of  only  corporeal  ***dhammas***, mental  ***dhamma***  called  sensuous  ***dhamma***  certainly.  Due  to  occurrence  of  sensuous consequence  consciousness,  the  registering  consciousness  can  take  objects  of  sensuous ***dhammas*** certainly. It should, therefore, be recognized registering can not follow the objects called lofty and Supra mundane ***dhammas*** which are taken by sensuous impulsion. It means registering  can  not  fall  after  sensuous  impulsions  which  take  object  of  lofty  and  Supra- mundane ***dhammas***. (***Abhi-A-2-147***) 

**7.A. Ten kinds of non-real corporealities** 

Those  (10)  kinds  of  non-real  corporealities  are  not  deserving  to  discern  as  three general characters and are called ***a***-***sammasana*** corporealities. Although any kind or all kinds of non-real corporealities are discerned as ***anicca***, continuity of ***vipassanā*** impulsion, which know as ***anicca***, can not arise really. Similarly although it is discerned as ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, continuity of ***vipassanā*** impulsions, which know as ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, can not arise. Therefore each kind of non-real corporealities must be discerned by dividing only(2) kinds but not (6) kinds shown in real corporealities. The righteous ***meditator*** must discern each kind through (4) ways of discerning, i.e., knowledge and pleasurable interest (***pīti***) are associated or not. The space-element will be presented as example. 

The  righteous  ***meditator***  must  scrutinize  the  space-element  which  lies  between corporeal units and then 

1. he must discern as the space-element. After wards those consciousness and mental concomitants which are knowing as space-element must be discerned again through 

   4) ways of discerning, i.e., knowledge and pleasurable interest are associated or not. 
1. Then that space-element must be discerned as corporeal ***dhamma***. After wards those consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  which  are  knowing  as  space-element  as corporeal  ***dhamma***  must  be  discerned  again  through  (4)  ways  of  discerning,  i.e., knowledge and pleasurable interest are associated or not. 

During discerning in that way the rule that "life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind beforehand" ought not to be forgotten. 

Table showing ***dhamma***-object-line mind-door-cognitive process, wholesome group, way of discerning by taking object of non-real-corporeality 



|Depended base  within heart              |54 |54 |54 |54 |
| :- | - | - | - | - |
|Mind-door-adverting ||<p>Impulsions </p><p>(7) times </p>|registering with root (2) times… or |registering without root cause (2) times |
|<p>1. discerning as </p><p>`    `space-element      -      </p>|12 |34 |34  … or |12 / 11 |
|<p>1. discerning as </p><p>`    `space-element      -      </p>|12 |33 |33  … or |11 / 11 |
|<p>1. discerning as </p><p>`    `space-element      -      </p>|12 |33 |33  … or |12 / 11 |
|<p>1. discerning as </p><p>`    `space-element      -      </p>|12 |32 |32  … or |11 / 11 |
|<p>2. discerning as </p><p>`    `corporeal ***dhamma***  -  </p>|12 |34 |34  … or |12 / 11 |
|<p>2. discerning as </p><p>`    `corporeal ***dhamma***  -  </p>|12 |33 |33  … or |11 / 11 |
|<p>2. discerning as </p><p>`    `corporeal ***dhamma***  -  </p>|12 |33 |33  … or |12 / 11 |
|<p>2. discerning as </p><p>`    `corporeal ***dhamma***  - </p>|12 |32 |32  … or |11 / 11 |
**PAGE-148** 

**7.B. Nine kinds of non-real corporalities which must be discerned in similar way** 

1. bodily expression (***kāya viññatti***) 
1. verbally expression (***vasī viññatti***) 
1. agility (***lahutā***) 
1. plasticity (***mudutā***) 
1. adaptability (***kammaññatā***) 
1. ***upacaya*** 
1. continuity (***santati***) 
1. ageing (***jaratā***)  
1. impermanence corporeality (***aniccatā***) 

Notes \_\_\_ The term, ***upacaya***, means the phenomenon of arising of veal  corporealities in one life, as beginning and the phenomenon of successive improvement of real corporealities, until all available corporealities are completed, until controlling faculties are completed for one life. Therefore only when one can keep corporeality-mentality in mind until the embryo at the moment of conception he must discern mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking object of those ***upacaya*** ***rūpa*** again. 
PAGE41
PAGE43

**7.C. A fact to be careful** 

During  discerning  mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  by  taking  objects  of  real corporealities, (11) kinds and non-real corporealities, (10) kinds which are inclusive in list of ***dhamma***-object-line,  because  those  corporealities,  which  are  intended  to  be  discerned, always arise in group-wise called corporeal unit as natural fixed law, the righteous ***meditator*** must discern in order to see corporeal unit previously. Afterwards he has to analyze each corporealities, which arise simultaneously within same corporeal unit, which are produced by either ***kamma*** or mind or temperature or nutriment, so as to reach the field of ultimate nature by insight. Each (8) kinds, (9) kinds, (10) kinds of corporealities within various corporeal units  must  be  discerned  upto  the  field  of  ultimate  nature.  Only  when  any  kind  of  real corporeality,  eye-transparent-element  etc.,  or  any  kind  of  non-real  corporeality,  bodily expression corporeality etc., can be selected and only when that corporeal ***dhamma*** strikes (=impinges) on the life-continuum mind-clear-element, he has to continue to discern and keep mental ***dhammas*** which arise by taking that corporeal ***dhamma*** in mind as shown in table. 

**PAGE-149** 

\8. Section of way of keeping mental ***dhammas*** within five-doors-cognitive process in mind 

The righteous ***meditator*** has to continue to discern and keep mental ***dhammas*** which arise by  taking  (5)  kinds of objects called visible-object,  audible-object, olfactory-object, sapid-object,  tactile-object,  in  mind.  The  righteous  ***meditator***  has  to  practise  so  as  to understand  meaning  of  (7)  kinds  of  consciousness  of  cognitive  process,  i.e.,  five-door- adverting,  seeing-consciousness,  receiving,  investigating,  determining,  impulsions, registering and (3) kinds of consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process, i.e., mind-door- adverting, impulsions, registering. Only when he has got understanding on meaning of those mind moment can he understand way of discerning clearly. 

**Notes**: \_\_\_\_\_ Those impulsions mental ***dhammas***, (34) kinds which are occurring within absorption cognitive process; or mind-door-cognitive process which arise by taking ***dhamma***- objects of real and non-real corporealities, or registering mind moment as mentioned above; or  within  five-door-cognitive  process,  mind-door-cognitive  process;  or  registering  mind moment which will be continued to present later are designated as faith-wisdom group mental ***dhammas*** so as to attain easy nomenclature for those persons with immatured knowledge in ***Abhidhamma***. 
PAGE43

Vol 2, pg 101-153.doc 

**Table showing Visible-object (= colour) line – wholesome group mental** ***dhammas*** 



|Eye-door-cognitive process ||mind-door-cognitive process|
| - | :- | - |
|***rūpa**-**hadaya***= 54 |eye = 54 |***hadaya*** =54 |<p>***hadaya*** </p><p>- 54 </p>|***hadaya*** =54 |***Hadaya*** =54 |***hadaya*** =54 |***hadaya*** =54 |***hadaya*** =54 |***hadaya*** =54 |***hadaya*** =54 |
|Five-doors-adverting |Seeing- consci : |receiving consci: |investiga- ting |determi- ning |impulsions (7) |register- ing (2) |life- continuum |mind-door adverting |impulsion (7) |<p>registering </p><p>(2) </p>|
|***pañcadvārāvaj-jana*** |***cakkhu- viññāņa*** |***sampaţic- chana*** |***santirana*** |***vuttho*** |<p>***Javana***  </p><p>***(7)*** </p>|***tadāram- maņa*** |***bhavaga*** |***manodvā rāvajjana*** |***Javana (7)*** |***tadārammaņa*** |
|1. as visible-object ||||as visible- object ||||as visible- object |||
|11 |8 |11 |12 |12 |34 |34/12/11 |34 |12 |34 |34/12/11 |
|11 |8 |11 |11 |12 |33 |33/11/11 |34 |12 |33 |33/11/11 |
|11 |8 |11 |12 |12 |33 |33/12/11 |34 |12 |33 |33/12/11 |
|11 |8 |11 |11 |12 |32 |32/11/11 |34 |12 |32 |32/11/11 |
|2.as corporeal    ***dhamma*** ….. |12 |34 (33-33-32) |34(33-33-32) 12/11 |
|3.as ***anicca*** ….. |12 |34 (33-33-32) |34(33-33-32) 12/11 |
|4. as ***dukkha*** |12 |34 (33-33-32) |34(33-33-32) 12/11 |
|5. as ***anatta*** ….. |12 |34 (33-33-32) |34(33-33-32) 12/11 |
|6. as ***a-subha*** ….. |12 |34 (33-33-32) |34(33-33-32) 12/11 |

PAGE45

44

**Table showing Visible-object (= colour) Line-wholesome group consciousness and mental concomitants**  



|Eye-door-cognitive process ||mind-door-cognitive process|
| - | :- | - |
|Five-doors-adverting |Seeing- consci : |Receiving consci: |investiga- ting |determi- ning |impulsions (7) |register- ing (2) |life- continuum |mind-door adverting |impulsion (7) |<p>registering </p><p>(2) </p>|
|11 |8 |11 |12 |12 |34 |34/12/11 |34 |12 |34 |34/12/11 |
|consciousness |conscious |Conscious: |conscious |conscious |<p>faith- Wisdom Group Mental ***dhammas*** </p><p>(34) </p>|<p>faith- wisdom group mental ***dhammas*** </p><p>(34) or </p><p>rootless </p><p>registering 12/11 </p>|<p>faith- wisdom group mental ***dhammas*** </p><p>(34) </p>|consci- |<p>faith- wisdom group mental ***dhammas*** </p><p>(34) </p>|<p>faith- wisdom group mental ***dhammas*** (34) </p><p>or </p><p>rootless </p><p>registering 12/11 </p>|
|***phassa*** |***phassa***  |***phassa*** |***phassa*** |***phassa*** ||||***phassa*** |||
|***vedanā*** |***vedanā*** |***vedanā*** |***vedanā*** |***vedanā*** ||||***vedanā*** |||
|***saññā*** |***saññā*** |***saññā*** |***saññā*** |***saññā*** ||||***saññā*** |||
|***cetanā*** |***cetanā*** |***cetanā*** |***cetanā*** |***cetanā*** ||||***cetanā*** |||
|***ekaggatā*** |***ekaggatā*** |***ekaggatā*** |***ekaggatā*** |***ekaggatā*** ||||***ekaggatā*** |||
|***jīvita*** |***jīvita*** |***jīvita*** |***jīvita*** |***jīvita*** ||||***jivita*** |||
|***manasikāra*** ||***manasikāra*** |***manasikā ra*** |***Manasikā ra*** ||||***manasikā ra*** |||
|***vitakka*** ||***vitakka*** |***vitakka*** |***vitakka*** ||||***vitakka*** |||
|***vicāra*** ||***vicāra*** |***vicāra*** |***vicāra*** ||||***vicāra*** |||
|***adhimokkha*** ||***adhimo- kkha*** |***adhimo- kkha*** |***adhimo- kkha*** ||||***adhimo- kkha*** |||
||||***pīti \**** |***viriya*** ||||***viriya*** |||
Notes: \_\_\_ \* If investigating associates with agreeable feeling, there are (12) mental ***dhammas***, due to presence of ***pīti***. If it associates with 

neutrality feeling, there are (11) mental ***dhammas***, due to lack of ***pīti***.
PAGE45

**8.A Way of discerning on mental *dhammas* of visible-object (=colour) Line wholesome**    

**group** 

The  righteous  ***meditator***  must  develop  concentration  and  then  he  has  to  keep corporeality-mentality which have been discerned previously in mind again. 

After wards \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Eye-transparent-element and life-continuum mind-clear-element must be kept in mind so as to impinge in the insight simultaneously. 
1. The visible-object, colour, of group of corporeal units must be taken into heart. Or the visible-object, colour, of a corporeal unit must be taken into heart. (In the aspect of mind-door-cognitive process specifically, one can discern by taking visible-object, colour, of a corporeal unit. Please see page 182 etc., in this volume.) 
1. When that visible-object, colour, strikes on two kinds of transparent element called eye-transparent-element  and  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  simultaneously;  or when that visible-object, colour, impinges on two kinds of transparent element called eye-transparent-element  and  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  simultaneously;  or when that visible-object, colour, appears on two kinds of transparent element called eye-transparent-element and life-continuum mind-clear-element simultaneously \_\_\_\_  these two kinds of cognitive process 
1) eye-door-cognitive process which takes visible-object and  
1) mind-door-cognitive process which takes visible-object only continuously will arise successively  but  separated  by  life-continuums.  If  one  time  of  eye-door-cognitive process arises, numerous mind-door-cognitive processes will arise continuously but separated by life-continuums. 
4. Five-doors-adverting,  determining  and  mind-door-adverting  consciousness  must determine  that  visible-object  as  colour  only.  Due  to  occurrence  of  wise-attention, wholesome impulsions will fall. Those (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of wholesome impulsions and registering are faith-wisdom group mental ***dhammas***. 

Notes \_\_\_\_\_ In above table only ***atimahatārammaņa vīthi*** and ***vibhūtārammaņa vīthi*** are shown. Remaining ***vīthis***, ***mahantārammaņa vīthi*** and ***a-vibhūtārammaņavīthi*** etc., will be understood  gradually  during  keeping  mental  ***dhammas***  in  mind  and  during  performing ***vipassanā*** practice. Among those cognitive process, the first mind-door-cognitive process is called  ***tadanuvattaka  manodvāra  vīthi***  (the  cognitive  process  which  follows  eye-door- cognitive process, which takes visible-object successively)  and successive mind-cognitive processes which also take visible-object are called ***suddhamanodvāra vīthi*** (=pure mind- door-cognitive  process).  However  the  Most  Venerable  ***Mahāgandhārammaņa***  ***Sayādaw*** suggested that all mind-door-cognitive processes which arise relating to fivefold doors are called ***tadanuvattika*** only. (***vīthi*** and group of three facts – 34) 

If he wants to keep consciousness in mind as beginning, he must try to see how consciousness  arises  through  the  fixed  route  or  mind  in  sequence  of  consciousness  of cognitive  processes.  He  must  practise  frequently  in  order  to  see  every  consciousness occurring in each mind moment, i.e.,  

**PAGE-153** 

