**PAGE-679** 

In the explanation of commentary, ***cittajarūpa*** which are produced by consequence consciousness; which are supported by ***kamma***, can also be called ***kammaja rūpa*** by mean of indirect way. Therefore, in order to exclude ***kamma-paccaya cittasamuṭṭhāna rūpa***, the commentator explained by adding adjective “***upādinnam***” for the word “***kammaja rūpam***”, resulting in the phrase, “if it is supported by ***upādinnaka kammajarūpa***”, etc… (***Mahāṭī*-2-403**) 

The meaning of explanations found in commentary and subcommentary are as follows. 

The nourishment ingested by beings is only ***utujaojaṭṭhamaka rūpa*** produced by temperature. Although the fire-element consisting in corporeal unit produced by temperature is able to produce new generations of corporeal  units  successively,  the  nutriment  consisting  in  those  corporeal  units  is  unable  to  produce  new generation of corporeal units called ***āhārajarūpa*** in the absence of supporting factor of the fire-element of vital nonads. When those beings ingest group of corporeal units called ***utujarūpa***, the latter reach into stomach, intestine, etc. Before spreading throughout body, these corporeal units are still ***utujarūpa*** in which containg nutriment is called ***utujaojā***. There are vital nonads produced by ***kamma*** in the stomach. Every vital nonad consists of four great elements which are ***upādinna-kammaja rūpa***, due to occurrence of previous cause called ***kamma***. The fire-element consisting in the vital nonad plays fundamental important role in digestion of food and arising of ***āhāraja rūpa***. That fire-element is known as ***udaraggi*** (= digestive fire) and it is impossible to arise without remaining three great elements. It means that if it gets supporting factor of ***upādinnaka kammaja rūpa***,  depending  on  the  four  great  elements  produced  by  ***kamma***,  internal  ***utujaojā***  can  bring  forth  new generations of corporeal units called ***āhārajaojaṭṭhamaka kalāpa***. 

3. ***Āhārapaccaya* = the corporeality supported by nutriment *Pāli Quotation* (*Vs*-2-251) (*Mahāṭī*-2-403)** 

**PAGE-680** 

“Each nutriment produced by four origins respectively, (***catusamuṭṭhānika ojā***), which 

is called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra***, benefits the whole body (= all kinds of corporealities) by ***āhārapaccaya***”, preached by  the  Buddha  in  ***Paṭṭhāna***.  All  kinds  of  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins  called  ***kamma***,  mind, temperature and nutriment (***catusamuṭṭhānika rūpa***), therefore, are called ***āhārapaccaya rūpa***. **(*Vs*-2-251)** 

The commentator explained that “***catusamuṭṭhānika rūpa*** are called ***āhārapaccaya rūpa***”, in order to show “physical nutriment” not only supports ***catusamuṭṭhānika rūpa*** but also produces them, really” **(*Mahāṭī*- 2-403)** 

4. ***Āhārapaccaya āhārasamuṭṭhāna* = the corporeality produced by nutriment which is supported by nutriment** 

***Pāli-Quotation* (*Vs*-2-251)** 

***Kabaļīkāra āhāra*** is only a group of corporeal units produced by temperature. The nutriments produced by  temperature  (***utujaojā***),  consisting  in  those  corporeal  units,  produce  new  corporeal  units  when  it  gets supporting  factor  of  the  fire-element  of  vital  nonad.  The  resultant  new  corporeal  units  are  called ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna rūpa***, due to occurrence of nutriment as previous cause. The nutriment consisting in those new  corporeal  units,  when  it  gets  supporting  factor  of  nutriment  of  succeeding  ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna  rūpa***, produces successive generation of new corporeal units again. Thus (10) to (12) new generations of corporeal units arise successively and this kind of ***ojjaṭṭhamaka rūpa*** is called ***āhārapaccaya āhārasamuṭṭhāna*** = the corporeality produced by nutriment which is supported by nutriment. 

There is a question that why do (10) to (12) new generations of corporeal units called ***āhārapaccaya āhārasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** arise successively? The answer is that \_\_\_\_\_ The nourishment which is to be ingested for one day is capable of supporting to produce new generations of corporeal units of ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa*** for throughout (7) days. 

**PAGE-681**  

The nutriment found in heavenly world is able to support ***catusamuṭṭhānika ojā*** for one or two months in order to produce new generations of corporeal units successively. In human world, the food ingested by mother spreads out the foetus through placental cord and it produces new generations of ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa***. The nourishment rubbed on the skin is also absorbed and it can produce ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa*** inside the body. These are examples of how ***anupādinnaka āhāra*** supports ***catusamuṭṭhānika ojā*** to produce ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa***. 

The nutriment consisting in every corporeal unit produced by ***kamma*** is called ***kammaja āhāra*** or ***upādiṇṇaka āhāra***. That ***upādiṇṇaka āhāra***, when it reaches to static phase, produces new ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa***. (if  it  is  supported  by  nutriment  consisting  in  ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna  rūpa***).  The  nutriment  consisting  in  that ***ojaṭṭhāna rūpa***, (if it is supported by nutriment consisting in ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna rūpa***), when it reaches to static phase, produces new ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa***. Thus the continuities of (4) to (5) new generations of corporeal units are brought forth connection  of new generations of corporeal units successively. It is similar to ***kammapaccaya āhārasamuṭṭhāra rūpa*** **(see 4.47.5)**. 

**One point to be observed** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Paṭṭhāna*-1-7) (*Abhi*-A-3-378)** 

***Mūlaṭīkā Sayadaw*** had remark on one point to be observed in this case. 

Although  the  Buddha  preached  generally  in  ***paṭṭhāna***,  that  the  nutriment  called  ***kabaļīkāra  āhāra***, which situating in the continuum of ***catusamsatisamuṭṭhāna rūpa***, benefits this body by efficiency of relation of nutriment (***āhāra paccaya***), especially, ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** benefits ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** by means of both direct cause (***janaka āhāra paccaya***) and indirect cause (***upatthambaka āhāra paccaya***) while the remaining three kinds of continuums of corporealities produced by ***kamma***, mind and temperature, only by means of indirect cause (supporting cause or ***upatthambaka āhāra paccaya***), explained in commentary. (***Abhi*-A-3-378**). 

**PAGE-682** 

In this case, ***Mūlaṭīkā Sayadaw*** and ***Anuṭīkā Sayadaw*** explained as follows. ***Pāli Quotation* (*Mūlaṭī*-3-190) (*Anuṭī*-3-258)** 

It is previously explained in above that the nutriment consisting in every corporeal unit produced by any kind  of  ***kamma***,  mind,  temperature,  nutriment,  is  called  ***kabaļīkāra  āhāra***.  It  should  be  accepted  the commentator’s explanation that ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** benefits continuum of corporeality produced by mind. The reason is as follows. 

The ***Buddha*** never preached ***upatthambaka āhāra paccaya*** of any one of 

1. nutriment called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** consisting in corporeal unit produced by mind (***cittasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** = CSR ), 
1. nutriments called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** consisting in corporeal units produced by ***kamma***, temperature and nutriment (***nocittasamutthāna rūpa*** = NCSR), 
1. nutriment  called  ***kabaļīkāra  āhāra***  consisting  in  corporeal  units  produced  by  both  mind  (CSR)  and remaining three causes (NCSR), benefit ***cittasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** by means of indirect cause (supporting cause or  ***upatthambaka  āhāra  paccaya***,  in  sections  of  ***Cittasamuṭṭhāna  duka***,  ***Pañhavāra***,  ***Paccayānuloma Vibhanga vāra***.  

If it benefits ***cittasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** by means of indirect cause, the Buddha will preach that **PAGE-683** 

***“cittasamuṭṭhāno  kabaļīkāro  āhāro  cittasamuṭṭhānassa  kāyassa  āhāra  paccayena  paccayo”***.  =  the nutriment called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** consisting in corporeal unit produced by mind benefits corporeality produced by mind through efficiency of relation of nutriment (***āhāra paccaya***)”. But the ***Buddha*** never preached like this. 

The  reasonable  fact  is  that  the  ***Buddha***  preached  that  those  nutriments  called  ***kabaļīkāra  āhāra*** consisting  in  corporeal  units  of  both  ***cittasamuṭṭhāna***  and  ***nocittasamuṭṭhāna***,  mentioned  above,  benefit ***nocittasamuṭṭhāna  rūpa***,  i.e,  corporealities produced by ***kamma***, temperature  and  nutriment, by  means  of indirect cause (supporting cause or ***uppatthambaka āhāra paccaya***). Therefore it means one should accept commentator’s explanation after scrutinizing and reasoning on it. 

According to explanations found in above sub-commentaries, it should be recognized the fact that the nutriment consisting in corporeal units produced by mind is unable to benefit nutriment of other corporeal units produced by mind by means of ***āhāra paccaya***. Similarly, each nutriment consisting in various corporeal units produced by ***kamma***, temperature, nutriment respectively is also unable to benefit nutriment of corporeal unit produced by mind respectively. 

However the nutriment consisting in corporeal unit produced by mind is able to benefit the nutriment consisting in those corporeal units produced by ***kamma***, temperature, nutriment by means of indirect factor of efficiency of relation of nutriment (***upatthambaka āhāra paccaya***). The nutriments consisting in corporeal units produced by ***kamma***, temperature, nutriment are able to benefit nutriments of other corporeal units produced by ***kamma***, temperature, nutriment respectively. These facts should be recognized well. 

5. ***Āhāra paccaya utusamuṭṭhāna* = the corporeality produced by temperature, which is supported by nutriment** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Vs*-2-251, *Mahāṭī*-2-403)** 

Every  corporeal  unit  produced  by  nutriment  consists  of  the  fire-element  which  is  called ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna tejo dhātu***. That fire-element consisting in corporeal unit produced by nutriment, when  it is reaching to the static phase, produce new corporeal unit called ***utusamuṭṭhāna ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa***. This kind of ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa*** (pure octad with nutriment as 8th factor) is called ***āhārapaccaya utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** (= the corporeality produced by temperature which is supported by nutriment). **(*Vs*-2-251)** 

**PAGE-684** 

It  should  be  recognized  that  “the  corporeality  produced  by  temperature  which  is  supported  by nutriment”, similar to “the corporeality produced by nutriment which is supported by temperature”, is able to produce  (10)  to  (12)  new  generations  of  corporeal  units  successively.  Noble  teachers  said  that  further explanation is not essential, due to finished to explain it. **(*Mahāṭī*-2-403)** 

***Pāli-Quotation* (*Vs*-2-251, *Mahāṭī*-2-403, 404)** 

In the section of occurrence of ***āhāraja rūpa***, it had been explained that the ingested ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** or the nutriment consisting corporeal unit produced by temperature, if it gets supporting factor of the fire- element  of  vital  nonad,  produces  new  corporeal  unit  called  ***ojaṭṭhamaka  rūpa  kalāpa***  (pure  octad  with nutriment as 8th factor). Those newly produced ***ojaṭṭhamaka rūpa*** are called ***āhāra samuṭṭhāna rūpa*** because of dependence on nutriment (***kabaļīkāra āhāra***). Therefore the nutriment called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** benefits ***āhārasamuṭṭhana  rūpa***  by  means  of  direct  cause  (***janaka  paccaya***).  It  is  able  to  benefit  the  remaining corporealities produced by three origins, i.e, ***kamma***, mind, temperature, by means of ***nissaya***, ***āhāra***, ***atthi***, ***avigata***, so called ***uppaṭṭhambaka*** cause (indirect cause). Thus one should discern the nature of arising of ***āhāraja rūpa***. **(*Vs*-2-251)** 

The nutriment called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** benefits ***āhāra samuṭṭhāna rūpa*** by means of ***janaka*** cause (direct cause). The nutriment consisting in corporeal units produced by nutriment benefits both 

1. nutriment consisting in other corporeal units produced by nutriment, 
1. ***kammasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** (= ***kammaja ojā***)** 
1. ***cittasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** (= ***cittaja ojā***) and 
1. ***utujasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** (= ***utuja ojā***) by means of efficiency of relations of ***nissaya*** (dependence), ***atthi*** (presence), ***avigata*** (non-disappearance), so-called ***upaṭṭhambhaka*** cause (indirect cause). 

**PAGE-685** 

***Nissaya* = dependence factor** 

1. Four mental aggregates benefit mutually each other, 
2. Four great elements benefit mutually each other, 
2. While ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness is arising mentality and corporeality benefit mutually each other, 
2. Mind and mental concomitants benefit ***cittajarūpa*** 
2. Four great elements benefit derived corporealities (***upādārūpa***) by means of ***nissaya paccaya*** (efficiency of relation of dependence). ***(Paṭṭhanā -1-5)*** 

In that case, the nutriment, a kind of derived corporeality, is unable to benefit four great elements and remaining derived corporealities by means of dependence factor. Therefore, ***Mahāṭīkā Sayadaw*** explained that “***nissaya  bhāvo  pana  paṭṭhāna  nayena  natthi***”.  =  there  is  no  efficiency  of  relation  of  dependence  in  the preaching methodology of ***Paṭṭhāna***. However, it should be recognized the fact that the commentator Sayadaw explained, by means of ***suttanta*** method (= indirect way), the fact, “the corporealities produced by nutriment can be called the corporealities which has got efficiency of relation of dependence of nutriment”. It should be recognized on the explanation of relation of dependence of temperature similarly. 

***Atthi* (presence)** \_\_\_\_\_ 

The ability to benefit, by the time, the causal ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna oja*** and the resultant ***kammaja ojā***, ***cittajaojā***, ***utujaojā***, ***āhāraoja***, so called ***catusamuṭṭhānika ojā*** are still present simultaneously, is called the relation of presence (***atthi paccaya***). 

***Avigata* (non-disappearance)** 

The mutual ability to benefit, before both the causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** have not ceased yet, is called relation of non-disappearance ***avigata paccaya***. Thus, it should be recognized the fact that the nutriment is able to benefit by means of relations of ***atthi***, ***avigata***, only when both causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** are still present according to ***Paṭṭhāna*** method while it is able to benefit by means of relation of dependence (***nissaya***) according to ***Suttanta*** method. **(*Mahāṭī*-2-403, 404)** 

Any ***meditators*** who wants to attain ***nibbāna*** should discern penetratively on the nature of arising of ***āhāraja rūpa*** by insight knowledge. ***(Vs-2-251)*** 

50. **The nature of *utujarūpa* (corporeality produced by temperature)** 

It should be known (5) modes of the nature of arising of corporeality produced by temperature as 

follows. 

1. ***utu*** = temperature 
1. ***utusamuṭṭhāna*** = the corporeality produced by temperature 
1. ***utu paccaya*** = the corporeality supported by temperature 
1. ***utupaccaya utusamuṭṭhāna*** = the corporeality produced by temperature which is supported by temperature 
1. ***utupaccaya āhārasamuṭṭhāna*** = the corporeality produced by nutriment which is supported by temperature. 

**PAGE-686** 

1. ***Utu* = temperature *Pāli-Quotation* (*Vs*-2-251)** 

The  fire-element  consisting  in  every  corporeal  unit  produced  by  four  origins,  i.e,  ***Kamma***,  mind, temperature, nutriment, is called ***utu*** (= temperature). There are two kinds of ***utu***, i.e, ***uṇṇha utu*** (= heat) and ***sīta utu*** (= cold). **(*Vs*-2-251)** 

The commentator explained that the fire-element consisting in every corporeal unit produced by four origins, is called ***utu***, due to ability of the fire-element to produce ***utujarūpa***. It is divided into two kinds depending on its potency, i.e., 

1. high potential fire-element as ***uṇṇautu*** (= heat) and 
1. low potential fire-element as ***sītautu***. **(*Mahāṭī*-2-404)**. 

In ***Mahāṭīkā***, volume 2 page 108, 109, it is also explained as follows. 

Three  kinds  of  elements,  the  earth-element,  the  fire-element  and  the  air-element,  are  called  tactile objects (***phuṭṭhabbārammaṇa***). Why doesn’t the water-element belongs to this tactile objects? Is it true that the nature of cold can be touched? Isn’t true that nature of cold as the water-element? 

If any one complains like this, it is true that the nature of cold can be touched. 

However, that nature of cold is not the water-element. It is actually, only the nature of the fire element. 

It is right. When the nature of the fire-element become low potential, perceiving on the nature of cold become apparent. The nature of cold is not potentiality of any kind of other elements but the fire-element only. 

If it is a question that how the meaning of perceiving on the nature of cold become apparent while the nature of the fire-element become low potential, can be understood well? It should be understood similar perceiving on this bank of river and that bank of river alternatively, due to presence of inconstant nature of it. 

Let us suppose that a river flows from north to south and there are two banks along with each side, east bank and west bank. For a person who stands, east bank recognized east bank as ‘this bank’, while west bank, ‘that bank’. On the otherhand, in the aspect of a person who stands west bank recognized ‘west bank’ as ‘this bank’, while ‘east bank’ as that bank alternatively. Those the term ‘this bank’ and ‘that bank’ are not constant but varied depending on various situations of persons. Similarly, the term of nature of heat and cold are also not constant usages. 

**PAGE-687** 

For, instance in summer, a person who stands under very hot sunshine enters under shade of tree and perceives the nature of cold. However a person who comes out of air-conditioned room perceives the nature of heat under that shade of tree indeed. Thus the term of the nature of heat or cold is not constant usage. 

It is also one reasonable point. If the nature of cold is the water-element, there will be two opposite kinds of nature, the nature of heat and cold within the same corporeal unit. It can not exist like this. It should, therefore, be known the nature of cold is not water-element. 

This is the answer for those persons who accept that the nature of inseparable condition of the four great elements. However this is also the answer for those persons who do not accept that the nature of inseparable condition of the four great elements, due to perceiving the specific function of each element within the same corporeal unit. 

Such teacher assumed that ‘the nature of cold is the air-element. Above mentioned explanation is also the answer for that person. For instance, if the nature of cold is the air-element, there will be two opposite kinds of nature, the nature of heat and cold within the same corporeal unit. It can not exist like this. It should, therefore, be known the nature of cold is not air-element. 

**PAGE-688** 

Then, such teachers assumed that the nature of flowing is the water-element, and the flowing nature of a liquid can be perceived by touching it. It can be complained them the fact that “this assumption is caused by great wrong conceit (***ahimāna***) because it is similar to assumption that the shape can be perceived by touching. It is right.\_\_\_\_ The elder teachers of olden days explained as follows. 

***Pāli Quotation (Mahāṭī-2-109)*** 

All beings always conceive that they can touch three great elements called the earth-element, the fire- element, the air-element, which arise together with the nature of flowing. 

As a person who touches the four  great elements impresses in the mind that the shape is touched practically, it should be known on the nature of flowing similarly. (***Mahāṭī-2-108,109***) 

2. ***Utusamuṭṭhāna* = the corporeality produced by temperature *Pāli Quotation (Vs-2251, 252, Mahāṭī-2-404)*** 

The corporeality which is obsessed by means of craving and wrong view as “I, mine”, etc., which is produced by ***kamma*** surrounded by ignorance, craving, clinging, which had been performed in any previous life is called ***upādinnakarūpa***. 

After receiving the supporting factor of ***upādinnaka rūpa***, the fire-element consisting in each corporeal unit produced by four origins is able to produce new corporeal unit called ***utuja rūpa*** when it reaches to the static phase. Sound nonad (***sadda navaka kalāpa***) which consists of basic (8) factor plus sound; the space-element; physical agility; physical plasticity; physical adaptability; ***upacaya***; and ***santati***, totally, these (15) kinds of corporealities are called ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa***. 

The fire-element (***utu***) is able to produce ***utujarūpa*** in the absence of ***upādinnaka rūpa***. However, due to lack of ability to produce ***utujarūpa*** in the absence of the ***upādinnaka rūpa*** related with corporealities of controlling faculties, such as eye controlling faculty, (***cakkhundare***), ear controlling faculty (***sotindare***) etc., the commentator explained that “***upādinnakam paccyam labittavā***” = “after receiving the supporting factor of ***upādinnaka rūpa***”. Only the fire-element consisting in pure octad produced by temperature is able to produce ***utujarūpa*** in the absence of ***upādinnaka rūpa***. (***Mahāṭī-2-404***) (**see 4.50.4. *utupaccaya utusamuṭṭhāna***) 

**PAGE-689** 

3. ***Utupaccaya* = the corporeality supported by temperature *Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-252)( Mahāṭī-2-404)*** 

The corporealities produced by (4) origins ***kamma***, mind, temperature, nutriment, so-called ***utupaccaya rūpa***  are  called  ***utupaccaya  rūpa***  (=  the  corporeality  supported  by  temperature).  ***Sabhāga  utu***  favourable temperature and ***visabhāga*** ***utu*** unfavourable temperature (= one-sidedly extreme heat or cold), i.e., favourable and unfavourable temperatures are cause of arising and perishing away of ***catusamuṭṭhānika rūpa*** respectively. (***Vs-2-252***) 

There are (15) kinds of corpoealities produced by temperature and other three kinds of corporealities produced by ***kamma***, mind, temperature. The favourable temperature (***sabhāga utu***) benefits for arising of those all ***catusamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** by supporting factor (***uppatthambhaka paccaya***). It should be known like this. 

However, unfavourable temperature ***visabhāga*** ***utu*** can bring forth different continuity of corporeality from  previous  ones,  similar  to  a  phenomenon,  snow  falls  on  lotus.  (It  means  that  before  snow  falls  the continuity of corporeality of lotus is normal but after snow had fallen on it the continuity of corporeality is altered.) Thus, the snow destroys previous continuity of corporeality of lotus through causality of arising of different continuity of corporeality. 

Therefore  the  commentator  explained  that  favourable  and  unfavourable  temperatures  are  causes  of arising  and  perishing  away  of  ***catusamuṭṭhānika  rūpa***  respectively  in  order  to  show  commonly  on  both ***sabhāga utu*** and ***visabhāga utu***. (***Mahāṭī-2-400***) 

It  means  that  favourable  temperature  is  the  cause  of  arising  of  ***catusamuṭṭhānika  rūpa***,  while unfavourable temperature, the cause of perishing away of the latter. In this case, the word, “perishing away” refers to succeeding process of the continuity of corporealities which is different from preceding process of the continuity of corporealities. 

**PAGE-690** 

4. ***Utupaccaya utu samuṭṭhāna* = the corporeality produced by temperature, which is supported by temperature** 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-252) (Mahāṭī-2-404)*** 

The fire-element consisting in every corporeal unit produced by ***kamma***, mind, temperature, nutriment, is  called  ***utu***  (temperature).  The  corporeality  which  is  produced  by  that  ***catusamuṭṭhāna  utu***,  is  called ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa***. The fire-element consisting in that corporeal unit produced by temperature is called ***utusamuṭṭhāna  tejo***.  That  ***utusamuṭṭhāna  tejo***,  when  it  reaches  to  static  phase  ,  is  able  to  produce  new corporeal unit called pure octad with nutriment as eighth factor (***ojjaṭṭhamaka kalāpa***) again. Then the fire- element consisting in that pure octad produces new pure octad again. Thus (10) to (12) generations of new pure octads arise successively as a group of ***anupādinnaka rūpa***. 

**Further Explanation** 

In the first becoming process of human life, (30) kinds of corporealities, i.e., body-decad, sex-decad, and  base-decad,  arise  simultaneously  and  are  produced  by  previous  ***kamma***  and  those  are  called  ***kamma samuṭṭhāna rūpa***. 

**PAGE-691** 

1. The fire-element consisting in those ***kamma samuṭṭhāna rūpa***, when it reaches to static phase, produces new  pure  octad  (***ojjaṭṭhamaka  rūpa***)  which  is  called  ***kamma  paccaya  utusamuṭṭhāna  rūpa***  (=  the corporeality produced by temperature which is supported by ***kamma***). (***Vs-2-250***) In order to produce new pure octad by temperature, it is essential to attain supporting factors of both ***kammaja tejo*** and remaining ***kammaja rūpa***. If supporting factor this kind is absent, it is unable to produce new  pure  octad  by  temperature.  Due  to  this  reason,  the  commentator  explained  that  “***upādiṇṇakam paccayam labittvā***” (= only when it gets supporting factor of ***upādiṇṇaka rūpa***). 
1. Those ***kammaja rūpa*** include ***hadaya vatthu*** (physical base of mind). Only when dependence factor of physical  base  of  mind  is  available,  can  ***manodhātu***,  such  as  first  ***bhavanga***  (life-continuum)  and ***manoviññāṇadhātu*** arise. In the realm of five group existence (***pañcavokāra***), if dependence factor of physical base of mind called heart-base is absent, ***manodhātu*** and ***manoviññāṇadhātu*** can not arise. Thus, only when supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa*** including heart-base (***hadaya vatthu***) is available, can the first  ***bhanvanga***  produce  ***cittaja  rūpa***  called  pure-octad  produced  by  mind  (***cittajaojaṭṭhamaka  rūpa***). Those pure-octad produced by mind consists of the fire-element (***tejo-dhātu***) which is able to produce new pure-octad when it reaches to static phase. This kind of pure-octad is called ***cittapaccaya utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa***. The arising of ***cittapaccaya  utusamuṭṭhāna  rūpa*** is related to presence of dependence  factor of ***kammaja rūpa*** including physical base of mind called heart-base depending on which mind arises. Thus supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa*** is really, essential to produce new pure-octad by ***cittasamuṭṭhāna tejo***. 
1. The fire-element consisting in corporeal units produced by nutriment also produces pure octad when it reaches to static phase. This kind of corporeality is called ***āhārapaccaya utu samuṭṭhāna rūpa*** (= the corporeality produced by temperature, which is supported by nutriment). It is impossible to arise ***āhāra samuṭṭhāna rūpa*** without supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa***. Only when supporting factor of the fire- element consisting in vital nonad, the nutriment consisting in ingested pure octad called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra*** can produce ***āhārasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** (corporeality produced by nutriment). Consequently, only when ***āhāra samuṭṭhāna rūpa*** arises, the fire-element consisting in those pure octad produced by nutriment is able to produce new pure octad. Thus it is essential to attain supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa*** for production of pure-octad called ***utu samuṭṭhāna rūpa***, which is supported by nutriment (***āhāra paccaya utu samuṭṭhāna rūpa***). 

**PAGE-692** 

4. The fire-elements consisting in three kinds of ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa***, i.e., ***(kamma paccaya) utusamuṭṭhāna, (cittapaccaya) utusamuṭṭhāna***, (***āhārapaccaya***) ***utusamuṭṭhāna***, are able to produce new pure octads, when those reach to static phase. These are called ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** which are also interconnected with the supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa***. As ***kammaja rūpa***, ***cittaja rūpa***, ***āhāraja rūpa*** are impossible to arise without supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa***, these ***kammajatejo***, ***cittajatejo***, ***āhārajatejo*** are also impossible to produce new pure octads without supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa***. Thus the arising of ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** depends on supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa***.  

Pure octads which are produced by the fire-elements consisting in  

1. (***kamma paccaya***) ***utusamuṭṭhāna***  
1. ***(cittapaccaya) utusamuṭṭhāna***  
1. (***āhārapaccaya***) ***utusamuṭṭhāna*** 

are called ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa***. That ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** consists of the fire-element which is called ***utusamuṭṭhāna tejo***. When it reaches to static phase, that ***utusamuṭṭhāna tejo*** produces new pure octad. The fire-element consisting in that pure octad is also able to produce next generation of pure-octad successively and these are called ***utupaccaya utusamuṭṭhāna*** (= the corporeality produced by temperature, which is supported by temperature). Thus (10) to (12) generations of pure octads can be produced successively as a group of ***anupādiṇṇaka rūpa***. (***Vs-2-252***) 

It is right\_\_\_ If the supporting factor of favourable temperature is available, the fire-element can bring forth very long continuity of corporealities with same kind even in the absence of ***upādiṇṇaka rūpa***. If the supporting factor of ***upādiṇṇaka rūpa*** is available, infinite long continuity of corporealities will be resulted. Therefore, the commentator explain that “***anupādinnapakkhe ṭhatvāpi***” = “although it exists as  inanimate group”,  it  can produce  ***utusamuṭṭhāna  rūpa***.  [According  to  the  word  ‘***pi***’  (=  although),  “if  it  is  available ***upādiṇṇaka rūpa***”, can be understood] 

**PAGE-693** 

It means that two kinds of worlds, i.e., 

1. animate world, hairs, bodily hairs, nails, claws, corn, mole, etc., of the living body, 
1. inanimate world, the corpse, can be seen very long continuity of corporeality produced by temperature in the absence of supporting factor of ***kammaja rūpa***, but as a ***anupādinna pakkha***. (***Mahāṭī-2-404***) 

[Before ingestion is taken place, the foods in the bowl and dishes, etc., are also long continuity of corporealities produced by temperature.  It should be understood the fact it also belongs to ***anupādiṇṇaka pakkha*** (= inanimate world)]. 

***vipassanobhāsa*** = the light of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge 

During arising of very strong ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge, the continuity of ***utuja rūpa*** which is produced by the fire-element consisting in ***cittaja rūpa*** can arise for a long time. It can spread from a room to very far external world depending on the power of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge. The light of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge is the bright colour of pure octads produced by both mind and temperature. The pure-octad produced by mind which is associating with ***vipassanā*** knowledge, can arise inside the body but not spread out external world. Many successive generations of pure-octads produced by the fire-element consisting in ***cittaja rupa***, are able to spread out not only internal body but also (10) directions of external world for very long distance. Those kinds of corporealities arising in external world successively are called ***utupaccaya utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa***, situating as ***anupādiṇṇka pakkha***. 

5. ***Utupaccaya*  *āhārasamuṭṭhāna***  =  the  corporeality  produced  by  nutriment  which  is  supported  by temperature 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Vs*-2-252) PAGE-694** 

The nutriments consisting in pure-octads produced by four kinds of ***utu*** (= fire-element) i.e, ***kamma samuṭṭhāna utu***, ***cittasamuṭṭhāna utu***, ***utusamuṭṭhāna utu, āhāra samuṭṭhāna utu***, are able to produce new pure octads when they reach to static phase. These nutriment consisting in those pure-octads, if the supporting factor  of  ***āhāraja  oja***  is  available,  can  produce  next  generations  of  pure-octads  again.  Thus,  (10)  to  (11) generations of pure-octads produced by nutriments arise continuously. (***Vs-2-252***) 

***Janaka*** and ***upatthambhaka*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-252)*** 

 ***(Mahāṭī-2-404)*** 

For  these  kinds  corporeal  units  mentioned  above,  this  fire-element  benefits  for  arising  of ***utusamuṭṭhāna rūpa, āhāra samuṭṭhāna utu*** by ***janaka*** cause (= direct cause for arising). The fire-element benefits for arising of the remaining three kinds, ***kammasamuṭṭhāna***, ***cittasamuṭṭhāna***, ***āhāra samuṭṭhāna***, by ***paccaya*** or ***upatthambhaka*** cause (indirect cause or supporting) as efficiency of relations of ***nissaya***, ***atthi, avigata*** (dependence, presece, non-dosappearance). 

Thus one should like to discern on the nature of arising of ***utujarūpa*** by penetrative ***vipassanā*** insight. 

The ***meditator***, who is discerning on the nature of arising of corporeality by insight as mentioned above, can be designated as “sometimes he discerns the corporeal ***dhamma***”. (***Vs-2-2-252***) 

After the nature of arising of corporeal ***dhammas*** has been known and seen by penetrative insight knowledge, due to presence of very short instant of ultimate ***dhammas***, the dissolution of those corporeal ***dhammas*** is also deserving to see for him. The commentator, therefore, explained that the ***meditator*** who is discerning on the nature of arising of corporeality by insight, can be designated as “sometimes he discerns the corporeal ***dhamma***”. 

It is right.\_\_\_\_ Discerning on only the nature of arising can not be designated as “generalizing by three characteristics”. It is, actually, the process of discerning which connects way of discerning on both nature of arising and nature of perishing away”. It should be recognized similarly on way of discerning on arising of corporeal ***dahmmas*** in later explanations. (This refers on ***vipassanā*** stage) (***Mahāṭī-2-404***) 

**Mode of discerning on the nature arising of corporeality (*rūpanibbattipassanākāra*) has been finished.** 

**PAGE-695** 

51. **Way of discerning on transparent corporeal units in eye** 

It should be read above explanations on the nature of arising of corporeality repeatedly in order to understand ti. Then the following way of discerning on corporeal ***dhammas*** can be accepted well. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  transparent  corporeal  units,  i.e.,  eye-decad,  body-decad,  in  eye  door,  as mentioned  tables  previously  (page640).  In  this  stage,  the  ***meditator***  can  see  both  transparent  and  non- transparent corporeal units. Both eye-decad and body-decad are mixed together in eye as mixture rice grains and wheat grains in petri dish. 

The seeing-consciousness which perceives the colour arises depending on eye-clear-sensitivity within the eye-decad and the touching-consciousness which perveives the tangible object (= the earth-element, the fire-element, the air-element) arises depending on body-clear-sensitivity within the body-decad. 

It can be understood the fact that “if any part of the eye is touched by tiny material, the touching- consciousness can arises. It shows that many body-decads are spreading throughout eye, due to arising of touching-consciousness which always depends on body-clear-sensitivity. 

Numerous eye-decads are situated on very small part which is about the size of head of louse within the eye. Body-decads and eye-decads mix together in there and it is very important to differentiate between two transparent corporal units. 

* ***rūpābhighātārahabhūtappasādalakkhaṇam cakkhu. (Vs-2-74)*** 

The  corpoeality,  characterized  by  transparent  four  great  elements,  which  is  deserving  to  strike  by visible-object, is called ***cakkhu pasāda*** (= eye-clear-sensitivity). The corporeal unit consisting of eye-clear- sensitivity as tenth factor, is called ***cakkhu dasaka kalāpa*** (=eye-decad). 

* ***Phoṭṭhabbābhighātārahabhūtappasādalakkhaṇa kāyo. (Vs-2-74)*** 

= The corporeality, characterized by transparent four great elements, which is deserving to strike by 

tangible-object, is called ***kāyapasāda*** (= body-clear-sensitivity). The corporeal unit consisting of dody-clear- sensitivity as tenth factor, is called ***kāyadasaka kalāpa*** (= body-decad). 

**PAGE-696** 

Thus it should be distinguished on each clear-sensitivity by discerning on both striking object and respective clear-sentivity simultaneously. After it is scrutinized on combination of striking object and respective clear-sensitivity simultaneously, it should be differentiate between eye-decad and body-decad systematically. 

**Way of discerning on decads existing in eye.** 

Develop concentration step by step and four great elements must be emphasized in the eye region. When  corporeal  units  can  be  seen  clearly,  analyze  on  transparent  one  on  which  (10)  kinds  of  nature  of corporealities  are  consisted.  Keep  in  mind  the  clear-sensitivity  within  that  transparent  decad.  Then  either transparent decad or non-transparent one adjacent to that transparent decad must be discerned simultaneously. If the colour of adjacent corporeal unit is striking to the clear-sensitivity of that decad, the latter is eye-clear- sensitivity, resulting in determination that decad is eye-decad. When the eye-decad is scrutinized and analyzed 

it’s constituents one by one, (10) kinds of ultimate nature of corporalities will be found in it. If the colour of adjacent decad does not strike on the clear-sensitivity, that might be body-clear-sensitivity. Thus the practising person should scrutinize frequently on those decads consisting of clear-sensitivity of any kind. 

Then any transparent decad inside the eye must be emphasized and analyzed clear-sensitivity of that decad. Then any of three elements, the earth-element, the fire-element, the air-element, called touching element (***phoṭṭhabba dhātu***), consisting in adjacent corporal unit, must be discerned and kept in mind. For instance, if the nature of hardness, i.e., the earth-element, of adjacent corporal unit which is striking to the clear-sensitivity, that decad consisting of clear-sensitivity is body-decad. Then those (10) kinds of nature of corporealities on that decad must be scrutinized one by one. If the touching element does not strike on the clear-sensitivity, it might be the eye-clear-sensitivity. Thus it must be scrutinized again and again in order to differentiate between two kinds of clear-sensitivities inside the eye. 

**PAGE-697** 

Now  the  ***meditator***  is  able  to  differentiate  and  keep  in  mind  sex-decad  (***bhāva  dasaka  kalāpa***) mentioned previsously and eye-decad, body-decad systematically. These kinds of corporeal units are decads produced by previous ***kamma*** (***kammaja kalāpa***). It should be recognized the fact that for a ***meditator*** who is able to discern three kinds of decads produced by ***kamma***, discerning on vital nonad (***jīvita navaka kalāpa***) has also been accomplished. Discerning on the vital nonad, therefore, has not been presented separately. [It will be explained kind of ***kamma*** is able to produce those ***kammaja rūpa*** and how to discern those kinds of ***kamma*** by sinight  in  later  section,  ***paccayapariggaha  ñāṇa***,  due  to  presence  of  interrelationship  between  those corporealities and causal relation of previous ***kamma***. In this stage, it should be recognized the fact, “these three decads are produced by ***kamma***” only.] 

**Important facts to be scrutinized** 

At the beginning stage of discerning on corporeal unit of various kinds, practising person must discern on the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element, colour, smell, taste, nutriment, life- faculty, eye-clear-sensitivity etc., which constitute in eye decad. One should scrutinize to know the fact that only when these  (10)  kinds of nature of corporealities constitute together with each other, the  transparent corporal unit called eye-decad can arise in the eye. When discerning knowledge is able to break through eye- decad and it is situated well on the nature of each corporeality, the form of eye-decad will be disappeared in him. One should discern on body-dedcd similarly in order to reach ultimate nature of corporealities. If the form of  corporeal  unit  disappears  but  only  the  nature  of  ultimate  corporeality  becomes  apparent  in  insight knowledge, the compactness of form of corporeality called ***samūhaghana*** becomes broken down and form- concept (***samūha paññatti***) has been removed. However, one must continue to discern specific function of each corporeal ***dhamma*** in order to break down the compactness of function of corporeality (***kicca ghana***). Way of discerning to break down this kind of compactness will be presented in **Volume IV,** ***Lakkhaṇādicatukka***. 

In  this  stage  of  distinguishing  on  corporeality  (***rūpa  pariggaha***),  only  the  specific  nature  of  each corporeality, called ultimate reality of corporeal ***dhamma***, must be emphasized and kept in mind one by one. Due to lack of sufficient concentration and sharp wisdom, some corporeal units still remains as particles in the insight  knowledge  of  ***meditator***.  When  the  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  becomes  powerful  in  later  stage,  like knowledge of dissolution (***Bhanga ñāṇa***) by which only dissolution of ***sankhāra dhammas*** can be discerned; The form of corporeal unit called ***saviggaha*** will become disappeared; and only the ultimate corporeal ***dhamma*** can be seen by insight. 

**PAGE-698** 

After (10) kinds of nature of corporealities within each decad are able to be distinguished, one must continue to discern nature of simultaneous arising of (10) kinds of corporealities within each decad. He must try to see only ultimate nature of corporealities whenever the object of corporeal units of every kind is intended to be taken clearly. In this stage, it should be emphasized on the nature of hardness, flowing, heat, supporting in order to see the four great elements within each decad. It should be recognized similarly on later explanation for vital-nonad, and pure octad. 

When the practising person is able to scrutinize  proficiently on eye-decad, body-decad and sex-decad in the eye, three kinds of decads produced by ***kamma***, found in the ear, must also be discerned one by one. 

52. **Way of discerning on decads existing in ear** 

Due to spreading throughout body, body decad, and sex-decad in remaining doors can be discerned as mentioned above. Now, it will be explained how to discern ear-decad as follows. 

***Saddābighātārahabhūtappasāda lakkhanam sotam. (Vs-2-74)*** 

The  corporeality,  characterized by  transparent  four  great  elements,  which  is  deserving  to  strike by sound-object,  is  called  ***sotapasāda***  (=  ear-clear-sensitivity).  The  corporeal  unit  consisting  of  ear-clear- sensitivity as tenth factor, is called ***sotadasaka kalāpa*** (= ear-decad). 

Four-great elements must be emphasized at inner region of ear where clear-sensitivity may be present. After seeing corporeal units, transparent decads must be emphasized and scrutinized the nature of corporealities one by one. Then either internal sound, such as sound of breathing, or external sound, such as bird’s sound, should be taken into heart as object. If that sound strikes the clear-sensitivity which is kept in mind by oneself, the  latter  is  ear-clear-sensitivity  (***sotapasāda***)  and  that  decad  with  ear-clear-sensitivity  is  called  ear-decad (***sotadasaka kalāpa***). If ear-decad is analyzed, (10) kinds of ultimate nature of corporealities can be found. 

He must scrutinized each specific character of those corporealities consisting in ear-decad one by one. Nature of simultaneous arising of those ultimate corporealities must be discerned by insight. If any kind of sound object never strike on clear-sensitivity, that kind of decad might be body-decad, due to presence of two kinds of transparent corporeal units only in the ear. 

**PAGE-699** 

Due to presence of ability to tactile object which strikes on any part of the ear, body-decad which is consisting  of  body-clear-sensitivity  as  dependence  of  touching-consciousness,  is  also  existing  in  the  ear. Similarly, sex-decad which consists of sex-corporality by which ear of male or female can be differentiate each other, is also existing in ear. Those body-decads and sex-decad should be discerned as mentioned in eye-door previously. 

53. **Way of discerning on decads of nose** 
* ***Gandābhighātāraha bhūtappasāda lakkhanam ghānam. (Vs-2-274)*** 

The corporeality, characterized by transparent four great elements, which is deserving to strike by smell object, is called ***ghānapasāda*** (= nose-clear-sensitivity). The corporeal unit consisting of nose-clear-sensitivity as tenth factor, is called ***ghānadasaka kalāpa*** (= nose-decad). 

Four great elements must be emphasized at inner region of nose where clear-sensitivity may be present. After  seeing  corporeal  units,  transparent  decads  must  be  emphasized  and  scrutinized  each  nature  of corporealities one by one. Then the smell of adjacent corporeal unit must be taken into heart as object. If that smell  strikes  on  the  clear-sensivity  which  is  kept  in  mind  by  oneself,  the  latter  is  nose-clear-sensitivity (***ghānapasāda***) and that decad with nose-clear-sensitivity is called nose-decad (***ghānadasaka kalāpa***). If nose- decad is analyzed, (10) kinds of nature of corporealities can be found. The practising person must scrutinize each specific character of those corporealities consisting in nose-decad one by one. Nature of simultaneous arising of those ultimate corporealities must also be discerned by insight. If any kind of smell object never strike on clear-sensitivity, that kind of decad, might be body-decad, due to presence of only two kinds of transparent corporeal units in the nose. 

Due to presence of ability to know tactile-object which strikes on any part of nose, body-decad with  body-clear-sensitivity which is dependence of touching-consciousness is also existing in the nose. Similarly, sex-decad with sex-corporeality by which nose  of male or female can be differentiated each other is also existing  in  the  nose.  Those  body-decads  and  sex-decads  must  be  discerned  as  mentioned  in  eye-door previously. Thus, there are three kinds of corporeal units produced by ***kamma*** in the nose. 

**PAGE-700** 

54. **Way of discerning on decads existing in tongue** 
* ***Rasābhighātārahabhūtappasādalakkhaṇājivhā*. (*Vs-2-74*)** 

The corporeality, characterized by transparent four great elements, which is deserving to strike by sapid- object,  is  called  ***jivhāpasāda***  (=  tongue-clear-sensitivity).  The  corporeal  unit  consisting  of  tongue-clear- sensitivity as tenth factor, is called ***jivhādasakakalāpa*** (= tongue-decad). 

Four great elements must be emphasized at inner region of the tongue. After seeing corporeal units, transparent decads must be emphasized and scrutinized each nature of corporealities one by one. Then the taste of adjacent corporeal unit must be taken into heart as object. If that taste strikes the clear-sensitivity which is kept in mind by oneself, the latter is tongue-clear-sensitivity and that decad with tongue-clear-sensitivity is called tongue-decad (***jivhādasakakalāpa***). If tongue decad is analyzed, (10) kinds of nature of corporealities can be found. Practising person must scrutinize each specific character of those corporealities consisting in tongue-decad one by one. Nature of simultaneous arising of those ultimate corporealities must be discerned by insight. If any kind of sapid-object never strike on clear-sensitivity, that kind of decad might be body-decad, due to presence of only two kinds of transparent corporeal units in the tongue. 

Due to presence of ability to know tactile-object which strikes on any part of tongue, body-decad with body-clear-sensitivity which is dependence of touching-consciousness, is also existing in the tongue. Similarly, sex-decad with sex-corporeality is also existing in the tongue. Those body decads and sex-decads must be discerned as mentioned in eye-door previously. Thus there are three kinds of corporeal units produced by ***kamma*** in the tongue. 

55. **Way of discerning on decads which are produced by *kamma*, existing on body** 

Body-clear-sensitivities, as  a  dependence  of  touching-consciousness,  which  are  able  to  know  every tactile-object, are situated throughout body. The corporeal unit consisting of body-clear-sensitivity, is called body-decad  (***kāyadasaka  kalāpa***).  Sex-decads  (***bhāvadasaka  kalāpa***)  also  spread  throughout  body.  Sex- corporeality consisting in sex-decad, bring forth recognition of male or female in order to differentiate between every parts of bldy of male and female. The practising person must discern on these body-decads and sex- decads which are produced by ***kamma*** in body-door as previous mentioned in the eye-similarly. 

**PAGE-701** 
