***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**THE CONCENTRATION SHOULOD BE DEVELOPED** 

**VOLUME I SECTION 2 Page 186 – 200** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiṭakadhara*)** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE13

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE-186** 

**SECTION 2. THE CONCENTRATION SHOULD BE DEVELOPED 2.1 Develop concentration** 

Every gentleman who wants to cease the suffering of rounds of rebirth (***samsāra***), must endeavour to know and see penetratively the Four Noble Truths because the suffering of rounds  of  rebirth  can  be  ceased  after  knowing  and  seeing  the  Four  Noble  Truths penetratively. There is a question how to practise previously, in order to know and see the Four Noble Truths by insight knowledge. It should be accepted seven stages of purification (***visuddhi***)  as  an  essential practice  for  everyone.  Only  when accept  like  this,  can  a  such ***meditator*** be agreeable answers for this question. 

1. Purify the virtue (***sīla***) 
1. Develop concentration (***samādhi***) 
1. Then, try to know the Four Noble Truths. 

These are answers for above question. 

***Pāli Quotation*** (***Mahāparinibbāna Sutta* -D-2-77**) 

According to ***Mahā parinibbāna Sutta*** **D-2-77**, it is shown that ‘this is the virtue, this is the concentration, this is the wisdom; the concentration soaked in the virtue, improves great benefits,  provides  great  results;  the  wisdom  soaked  in  the  concentration,  improves  great benefits, provides great results; the mind soaked in the wisdom, can escape well from cankers (***āsava***). 

Which  kinds  of  cankers!  These  are  the  canker  of  sensual  desire,  (***kāmāsava***),  of existence (***bhavāsava***) and of ignorance (***avijjāsava***). **(*S-2-77*).**  

If one escapes from cankers, he is able to escape from the suffering of rounds of rebirth. In order to ceases the suffering of rounds of rebirth, any one therefore, should \_\_\_\_ 

1. develop the concentration socked in the virtue, 
1. meditate the wisdom soaked in the concentration. 

Then the mind soaked in the wisdom, can escape well from cankers. In order to attain powerful mind, it should be soaked in the virtue, concentration and wisdom. When the virtue, concentration  and  wisdom  become  standard  efficacy,  the  mind  soaked  in  those  virtue, concentration and wisdom become sharper and sharper than the thunderbolt of the king of ***deva*** (***sakka***).  

**PAGE-187** 

It can be appeared the ability to eradicate all defilements. If every one wants to attain the most powerful mind, he has to fulfil three trainings, i.e., virtue, concentration and wisdom respectfully.  After  purifying  the  virtue,  the  second  training,  the  concentration  must  be fulfilled, at least up to access concentration. 

2. **Expounces on the concentration** (***Samadhi Suttas***) ***Samyotta*-3-363 (*Pāli*) 2 paragraph:** 
- ***Bhikkhus***!  Develop  concentration,  the  ***bhikkhu***  with  sufficient  concentration, 

knows correctly and distinguishes really.  Which ***dhamma*** would be known correctly and distinguished really? it can be known correctly and distinguished really the fact that “this is the Noble Truth of Suffering”. It can be known correctly and distinguished really the fact that “this  is  the  Noble  Truth  of  the  Cause  of  Suffering”.  It  can  be  known  correctly  and distinguished really the fact that “this is the Noble Truth of the Cassation of suffering”. It can be known correctly and distinguished really the fact that “this is the Noble Truth of the Practice Leading to the Cessation of Suffering”.  

***Bhikkhus***! Develop concentration, the ***bhikkhu*** with sufficient concentration, know correctly and distinguish really. 

***Bhikkhu***, you should, therefore, endeavour to know the facts “this is the Noble Truth of Suffering”, “this is the Noble Truth of the Cause of Suffering”, “this is the Noble Truth of the Cessation of Suffering”, and  “this is the Noble Truth of the  Practice  Leading to the Cessation of Suffering”. (***Samyotta*-3-363**). 

Again read the following passage instructed by the Buddha in the ***Samādhi Sutta***, ***Khanda vagga Sam yutta***. 

***Pāli Quotation*** (***Sam*-2-12**, ***Samādhi Sutta***) **PAGE-188** 

- ***Bhikkhus***! Develop concentration, the ***bhikkhu*** with sufficient concentration, know 

correctly and distinguish really. Which ***dhamma*** would be known correctly and distinguished really? 

1. both the nature of causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of corporeality and the nature of causal and resultant cessation of corporeality, (***rūpa***), 
1. both the nature of causal and resultant ***dhamma*** of feeling (***vedanā***), and the nature of causal and resultant cessation of feeling (***vedanā***), 
1. both the nature of causal and resultant ***dhamma*** of perception (***saññā***), and the nature of causal and resultant cessation of perception (***saññā***), 
1. both the nature of causal and resultant ***dhamma*** of ***kamma***-formation (***sańkhāra***), and the nature of causal and resultant cessation of ***kamma***-formation (***sańkhāra***),  
1. both the nature of causal and resultant ***dhamma*** of consciousness (***viññāņa***), and the nature of causal and resultant cessation of consciousness (***viññāņa***), would be known correctly and distinguished really. (***Sam*-2-12**) 

In both two ***Samādhi Suttas***, mentioned above, the Buddha strongly urged to develop concentration in order to know the Four Noble Truths really. Then the following ***dhamma*** belong to the Four Noble Truths, 

1. both the clinging five aggregates (***upādānakkhandā***); 
1. the nature of the arising of clinging five aggregates, caused by the ignorance (***avijjā***), the craving (***taņhā***), the clinging (***upādāna***), the ***kamma***-formation (***sańkhāra***) and the action (***kamma***); 
1. the cessation of the resultant five aggregates, which is not able to reappear in future because  of  the  cessation  of  the  causal  ***dhamma***,  i.e,  the  ignorance,  the  craving,  the clinging, the ***kamma***-formation and the action, after the fourth Path-Knowledge (***arahatta magga ñāņa***) appeared; and 
1. the arising and passing away of both causes and results, should be distinguished really. For this purposes, the Buddha instructed to develop concentration. 

These  instructions,  indeed,  are  vital  important  to follow  for  every ***meditator***  who wants to attain ***nibbāna*** really. This is because the fact that the corporeality, the mentality, the causes, the results and the general characters of impermanence (***anicca***), suffering (***dukkha***), non-self  (***anatta***),  of  ***sańkhāra  dhamma***  (corporeality,  mentality,  causes  and  results),  preached  by  the  Buddha,  can  be  distinguished  only  in  the  presence  of  sufficient concentration, indeed. 

3. **The Corporeality (*rūpa*)** 

The corporeality, preached by the Buddha, indeed, occurs as corporeal unit (***rūpa kalāpa***), but not ability to occur uniquely. The corporeal unit is the smallest system in the physical universe. These units are ***pramā*** minute particles, about sub-atomic particles in size. In this case, ‘about’ means only estimate of it’s size, not exactly the same as the size of sub- atomic particle,  known by  modern physicists. The corporeal unit consists of, at least, 8- factors of corporeality, i.e, the earth-element (***pathavī***), the water-element (***āpo***), the fire- element  (***tejo***),  the  air-element  (***vāyo***),  colour  (***vaņņa***),  smell  (***gandha***),  taste  (***rasa***)  and nutriment (***ojā***). 

**PAGE-189** 

Some corporeal units consist of 9 factors of corporeality while 10 factors in some kinds. Those factors are the ultimate reality of the corporeality (***paramaṭṭha rūpa***) to which the ***meditator*** must be able to discern and distinguish by insight  knowledge.  In order to distinguish like this, the ***meditator*** must, 

1. discern on the corporeal unit firstly,  
1. be able to analyze the character of each factor, consisting in 8 or 9 or 10 factors of corporeal units by insight knowledge, second. 

Only when each kind of corporeal unit can be analyzed up to the ultimate reality, 28 kinds of corporeality can be known thoroughly. 

4. **The Doctrine found in *Mahāgopālaka Sutta*** 

In ***Mahāgopālaka Sutta***, ***Mūla paņņāsa***, (***M-1-281-286***), the Buddha preached that “it can be said, the corporeality had not been known yet unless the four primary elements (***mahābhūta***)  and  the  secondary  or  derived  corporeality  (***upādā  rūpa***)  which  occurred depending on those four great elements, have not been distinguished yet. As a cowherd who does not know how many cows he tends totally or how many white colour, how many red colour... etc, of each kind, should not tend those cows, a ***bhikkhu*** who does not know all corporealities of primary ones and secondary ones of which, 

1) both quantitatively and  
1) the producing cause of corporeality, can not improve the Noble Path-Knowledge (***ariya magga ñāņa***) and the Fruit-Knowledge (***phala ñāņa***) in the Buddha’s ***sāsanā***. 

***Pāli Quotation* (*M-A-2-163*)** 

In  the  commentary  of  ***Mahagopālaka  Sutta***,  it  is  mentioned  that  “unless  the meditating ***bhikkhu*** is knowing, 

1) both quantitatively and  
1) the producing cause (***samuṭṭhāna***) of the corporeality, he will be unable to reach up to the peak of the Path-Knowledge and Fruit-Knowledge by means of …. 
1. discerning on the corporeality, 
1. discerning on the mentality, 

**PAGE-190** 

3. discerning on corporeality and mentality, 
3. distinguishing and taking into heart the causal relations and  
3. generalization  of  three  characters  i.e,  ***anicca***,  ***dukkha***,  ***anatta***,  of  ***sańkhāra  dhamma*** (corporeality, mentality, cause and result) successively. 

If any ***meditator*** has strongly desire to feel the taste of the Path-Knowledge, the Fruit- Knowledge  and  ***nibbāna***,  he  must  follow  respectfully  on  these  admonishments  of  the Buddha. 

In order to know correctly the corporeality by means of 

1) both 28 kinds as quantitatively and  
1) (a) which kinds are produced by the action (***kamma samuṭṭhāna***), 
2) which kinds are produced by mind (***citta samuṭṭhāna***), 
2) which kinds are produced by temperature (***utu samuṭṭhāna***), 
2) which kinds are produced by nutriment (***āhāra samuṭṭhāna***), 
2) which kinds will not be produced by any cause, etc… the analytical knowledge plays vital  important  role  in  discriminating  each  specific  character  of  the  ultimate  reality, consisting  in  various  kinds  of   corporeal  units,  such  as  eight,  nine,  or  ten  factors  of corporeal unit, etc … If such ***meditator*** is neither able to see the corporeal units nor able to  analyze  the  specific  characters  of  the  ultimate  corporeality,  consisting  in  various corporeal units (although he is able to see corporeal units as a general), it is impossible to distinguish really the corporeality by means of\_\_\_\_ 
1) which kinds are produced by action, (***kamma***), 
1) which kinds are produced by mind, 
1) which kinds are produced by temperature, 
1) which kinds are produced by nutriment, 
1) which kinds will not be produced by any cause etc. 

Unless it is able to analyze the corporeal unit to distinguish the nature of ultimate corporeality, the insight knowledge will not penetrate upto the field of ultimate reality of corporeality.  The  concentration,  therefore,  plays  the  most  important  role  in  the  way  of practice that leads to the field of the ultimate reality through seeing the corporeal units and analyzing on those units. 

Then the mentality would be also taken into heart as a door-wise system (six sense bases) according to ***Visuddhi Magga***, **2-223** and ***Sammoha-vinodanī***, (***Abhi-A*-2-241**). In the Sub Commentary, ***Mahāṭīkā*-2-352**, it is explained that the commentators decided the fact that  there  is  no  confusion  in  discerning  on  the  mentality by  means  of  door-wise  system (***āyatana dvāra***). 

**PAGE-191** 

According to the Buddha’s philosophical doctrine (***Abhidhamma***) there are two kinds of doors (***dvāra***) in terminology. Three kinds of doors, i.e, bodily action (***kāya dvāra***), verbal action  (***vacī  dvāra***)  and  mental  action  (***mano  dvāra***)  are  called  action  of  doors  (***kamma dvāra***). Six kinds of doors, i.e., eye-door (***cakkhu dvāra***), ear-door (***sota dvāra***), nose-door (***ghāna  dvāra***),  tongue-door  (***jihvā  dvāra***),  body-door  (***kāya  dvāra***)  and  ***bhavańga***  mind clearness (***mano dvāra***) are called sense bases of doors (***āyatana dvāra***) (***Mahaṭī-*2-410**). 

During taking into heart the mentality, it should be discerned successive door-wise system one by one, i.e., eye-door thought process (***cakkhu dvāra vīthi***), ear-door thought process  (***sota  dvāra  vīthi***),  nose-door  thought  process  (***ghāna  dvāra  vīthi***),  tongue-door thought process (***jihvā dvāra vīthi***), body-door thought process (***kāya dvāra vīthi***) and mind- door  thought  process  (***mano  dvāra  vīthi***)  which  are  known  as  six  sense  bases  of  doors (***āyatana dvāra***). This is because the consciousness always occurs in  accordance with the fixed law of mind (***citta niyama***) called successive thought process (***vīthi***) one by one. 

Each consciousness of thought process always occurs according to the fixed law of mind, but never out of this fixed law. The mentality, therefore, should be discerned by means of  successive  sense  bases  depending  on  the  nature  of  its  route  one  by  one.  Then  the consciousness  usually  occurs  as  a  mental  unit  consisting  at  least  7  mental  concomitants (***cetasika***), but never occurs single alone in each thought moment (***cittakkhaņa***). 

The smallest mental unit (***nāma kalāpa***) can be occurred at least 8 mind and mental concomitants,  i.e.,  consciousness  (***citta***),  contact  (***phassa***),  feeling  (***vedanā***),  perception (***saññā***),  volition  (***cetanā***),  one-pointedness  (***ekaggatā***),  life-faculty  (***jīvita***),  intention  (***manasīkāra***). The insight knowledge will be able to reach up to the ultimate mentality only after attaining the ability to discern the specific character of each mentality, consisting in every mental unit of successive thought moments which always occurs in accordance with the fixed law of mind. The concentration, therefore, plays the most important role in the way of practice that leads to the field of the ultimate mentality through seeing the mental units and analyzing on those units. 

[Notes: In this case it does not mean on the consciousness out of cognitive process (***vīthi mutta citta***) but all consciousness belong to thought process would only be emphasized and expressed like this.] 

Then  only  when  the  sufficient  concentration  had  been  developed,  the  insight knowledge  which  is  able  to  distinguish  the  causal  relations  of  those  corporeality  and mentality, can be appeared in every ***meditator***. Indeed, only the gentleman with powerful concentration,  is  capable  of  practising  up  to  the  peak  of  the  Path-Knowledge  and  Fruit- Knowledge  through  real  ***vipassanā***  insight  of  the  three  kinds  of  generalization  on  the corporeality and mentality, associated with their causal relations, systematically. 

5. **From the purification of consciousness to the purification of view  *Pāli Quotation*** (***Visuddhi*-2-222**) (***Abhidhammattha sanghaha***) 

The ability of knowing and seeing the ultimate corporeality and mentality and the discriminative  knowledge  of  the  corporeality  and  mentality  by  means  of  characteristic (***lakkhaņa***), function (***rasa***), manifestation (***piccupatthāna***), proximate cause (***padatthāna***), can be called the purification of view (***diṭṭhi visuddhi***). The ***meditator*** who wants to fulfil that kind of purification, should like to endeavour to fulfil the purification of consciousness (***citta visuddhi***) previously.  

**PAGE-192** 

***Citta visuddhi nāma saupacārā aṭṭha samāpattiyo*. (*Visuddhi*-2-222)** 

- Eight mundane absorption, including the neighbourhood concentration (***upacāra samādhi***) are called the purification of consciousness. 

In order to fulfil the purification of consciousness, it should, therefore, be endeavour to acquire either  neighbourhood concentration, any one kind of full concentration (***appanā sanādhi***), or all eight kinds of absorption (***aṭṭha samāpatti***). 

These explanations would be quoted for the fact that ‘the concentration should be developed’ according to the Buddha’s preaching and decisions found in commentaries. 

6. **The momentary concentration (*khaņika samādhi*)** 

Some  teachers,  learned  in  scriptures,  suggested  that  the  ***meditator***  without  full concentration (***suddha vipassanā yānika***) is able to attain ***vipassanā*** insight and it is not necessary to develop concentration any more. They referred to the explanation of the sub- commentary of ***Visuddhi Magga***. It would, therefore, be explained continuously about three momentary concentration, as follows: 

1) the momentary concentration according to the sub-commentator of ***Visuddhi Magga***  
1) the momentary concentration of ***Suddha Vipassanā Yānīka*** (***SVY***) and  
1) the momentary concentration occurring during ***Vipassanā*** practice being taken place. 

**2.2(1). The  momentary concentration according to  the sub-commentator of *Vissudhi*** 

***Magga*** 

***samathayānikassa  hi  upacārappanāppabedam  samādhin***,  ***itarassa  khaņika samādhin***,  ***ubayesampi  vimokkha  mukhattayam  vinā  na  kadācipi  lokkuttarādhigamo sambavati*** .. (***Mahāṭi*-1-15**). 

The meaning of this ***pāli*** passage is as follows: 

1. ***Samatha yānika*** person (a ***meditator*** with full concentration) will never attain the Supra- mundane  ***dhamma***,  without  attaining  two  kinds  of  concentration,  known  as neighbourhood (***upacāra***) and full (***appanā***) concentration. 
1. ***Suddha vipassanā yānika*** person (a ***meditator*** with neighbourhood concentration) will never  attain  the  supra-mundane  ***dhamma***,  without  attaining  momentary  concentration (***khanika samādhi***). 
1. Both  two  persons,  mentioned  above,  will  never  attain  the  Supra-mundane  ***dhamma***, without  attaining  three  kinds  of  insight  knowledge  (***anupassanā  ñāņa***),  insight knowledge  of  impermanence  (***aniccānupassanā  ñāņa***),  the  insight  knowledge  of suffering (***dukkhā nupassanā ñāņa***), the insight knowledge of non-self (***anattā ñāņa nupassanā ñāņa***), called ***vimokkha-mukha***, the cause of escape from the suffering of rounds rebirth (***samsāra***). 

Those are the meaning of above ***Pāli quotation***. 

**PAGE-193** 

***Mahāṭikā Sayadaw***, the sub-commentator explained this quotation in order to explain the verse “***sīle patiṭṭhāya naro sapañño***”, which is the back-bone of the commentary called ***Visuddhi Magga***. It will be clear understood after comprehend relations between the meaning of  this  verse  and  the  explanation  of  sub-commentator.  The  meaning  of  this  verse  is  as follows. 

1. A ***meditator*** who has the seed of knowledge, associated with the birth consciousness, called ***tihetuka***, three roots, should like to  
1. stand on the ground of virtue and  
1. endeavour to develop concentration called ***citta***, 
1. improve the wisdom (***paññā***) called ***vipassanā*** knowledge. 
1. That person, associating with the strenuous effort (***sammappadhāna viriya***) which is able to burn defilements (***kilesa***); 
6. associating with the mindfulness(***sati***) which is able to discern ***sańkhāra dhamma***; who has  fulfilled  matured  knowledge  of  ***nipaka***,  called  discriminative  knowledge,  will  be capable of removing the shrub of craving (***taņhā***). 

This is the meaning of the verse. 

Any person with above six factors will be able to eradicate all carving totally for good during the moment of the Noble Path-Knowledge. In order to eradicate all craving, it should be standing up on the ground of virtue, developing concentration call ***citta***, and ***vipassanā*** insight called ***paññā*** (wisdom). There is a question on the fact that “whether, ***citta*** and ***paññā*** are mundane or supra-mundane.” ***Mahāṭikā Sayadaw*** answered this question as follows:  

***Pāli Quotation* (Mahāṭi-1-15) one paragraph;** 

It  should  be  recognized  that  “it  should  be  developed  the  supra-mundane  ***citta*** (concentration)  and  the  supra-mundane  ***paññā***  (wisdom)  in  accordance  with  the ***ukkaṭṭhaniddesa naya***, which is the method showing the best meaning. Indeed, if it would be improved the Supra-mundane ***citta*** (concentration) and the Supra-mundane ***paññā*** (wisdom), the network of craving would be eradicated totally for good, known as ***samuccheda pahāna*** during the knowledge of the Path-moment. But the mundane ***citta*** (concentration) and the mundane ***paññā*** (wisdom) are incapable of eradicating to the network of craving totally for good. Due to this reason, it does not mean the mundane ***citta*** and ***paññā*** in this verse. 

In this case, however, the supra-mundane ***citta*** and ***paññā*** can not be occurred without the  mundane  ***citta***  and  ***paññā***,  with  the  result  that  it  can  be  recognized  that  the  latter (mundane) to be also its meaning by means of ***nānantarika naya*** which is the method of unavoidable condition. 

**PAGE-194** 

It  is  all  right!  In  the  absence  of  two  kinds  of  concentration,  neighbourhood-and-full- concentration for ***samatha yānika*** person; in the absence of momentary concentration for ***suddha vipassanā yānika*** person; in the absence of three kinds of ***vipassanā*** insight, ***aniccā nupassana ñāņa***, ***dukkhā nupassanā ñāņa***, ***anattā nupassanā ñāņa***, for both ***samatha*** and ***suddha vipassanā yānika*** persons, the supra-mundane ***citta*** and ***paññā*** can not be appeared by chance, indeed. 

The  commentator  Sayadaw,  therefore,  explained  that  “it  should  be  developed  the concentration as well as the ***vipassanā*** insight..” (***Mahāṭī*-*1-15***). 

According to the suggestion of the sub-commentator Sayadaw, it can be assumed that the momentary concentration of ***suddha vipassanā yānikia*** person refers to ***samatha*** stage (i.e.,  duration  of  developing  concentration  to  see  the  ultimate  corporeality,  the  ultimate mentality and their causal relations before performing ***vipassanā*** practice for all ***meditators***). It should be clear understood difference between the momentary concentration, appeared in ***samatha*** stage and that appeared in ***vipassanā*** stage. However, if the way of ***samatha yānika*** person would be clear understood, it may be easy to understand the way of ***suddha vipassanā*** ***yānika*** person and then the way of discerning on to the stage of the purification of view (***diṭṭhi visuddhi***) from the purification of consciousness (***citta visuddhi***) which depends on both neighbourhood and full-concentration, would like to presented. 

7. **The way of *samatha yānika*** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Visuddhi*-2-222) two paragraph:** 

\- The ***samatha yānika*** person who wants to fulfil the purification of view, must enter into any kind of absorption of world of form (***rupāvacara***) or that of formless world (***arūpavacara***) except  the  absorption  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  (***neva-saññā-nā-saññā- yatana  jhāna***)  and  emerge  from  that  absorption  after  which  take  into  heart  either  the absorption factors, i.e., initial application (***vitakka***), sustain application (***vicāra***), pleasurable interest  (***pīti***)  etc…  or  the  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  associating  with  that absorption  by  means  of  the  characteristic,  function,  manifestation  and  proximate  causes. After keeping in mind those ultimate mental ***dhamma***, the latter should be take into heart as ***nāma***  (mentality) because  it  means  ‘the  ability  to  approach  to  the  object  of  sign  of  full concentration (***paṭibhāga nimitta***)’. 

As a simile, when a man find a snake in the house, he follows it and see the resting site of snake, the ***meditator*** also discerns the mentality ***dhamma*** and then the investigates “how does this mentality ***dhamma*** arises depending on which ***dhamma***”.  

**PAGE-195** 

As  a  result  he  sees  the  heart  base  corporeality  (***hadaya  vathu***)  of  mind,  including  four primary  elements  and  derived  corporeality  (***upādārūpa***)  excluding  the  heart  base corporeality, and then take into heart those corporeal ***dhammas***. That ***meditator*** distinguishes and keeps in mind those corporeal ***dhammas*** as the ***rūpa*** (corporeality) which means ‘the character  of  collapse  or  dissociation  (***ruppana  lakkhaņa***).  Then  he  keeps  in  mind  the ***dhamma*** which has the ability to approach to the object, is the mentality while the ***dhamma*** which has the character of collapse or dissociation is the corporeality in brief. (***Visuddhi*-2- 222**). 

[In this case, the primary and secondary corporeality, found in the heart, are total of 54 kinds qualitatively. 

The primary and secondary corporealities found in 6 doors or 42 bodily parts (***koṭṭhāsa***) would be presented in the section of meditation on corporeality (***rūpa kammaṭṭhāna***). The mind and  mental  concomitants are usually 34 in number for the  first absorption (***jhāna***) generally. There are 35 mind and mental concomitants in the first absorption of compassion (***karuņā***), and that of appreciative joy (***muditā***). Those mind and mental concomitants, found in the first absorption and remaining ones would be presented in the section of meditation on mentality (***nāma kammaṭṭhāna***, volume 2.] 

After taking into heart mind and mental concomitants of each absorption, including it’s  dependent  corporeality,  primary  ones  and  secondary  ones  of  the  corporeality,  the remaining corporeality and mentality called miscellaneous ***sańkhāra*** would be also discerned and kept in mind, by means of characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause, similarly. It is due to the Buddha, himself, preached the fact that the suffering could not be ceased, unless the all corporealities and mentalities have been distinguished by three kinds of full understanding (***ti-pariññā***), i.e., the full understanding on objects (***ñāta pariññā***), the full understanding on propagation of the knowledge (***tīraņa pariññā***) and the full understanding on abandonment (***pahāna pariññā***). (***Samyotta*-2-249, 250**). This reason would be explained in detail in Section 3, The Recollection of the Mindfulness of Breathing (***ānāpānassati***). 

If ***samatha yānika*** person prefers to discern the meditation subject of corporeality (***rūpa kammaṭṭhāna***) but not that of mentality previously, he can discern the former firstly, as well as ***suddha vipassanā yānika*** person’s way. This way would be presented as follows. 

8. **The way of *Suddha vipassanā yānika*** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Visuddhi-2-222*) one paragraph:** 

If  any  person,  either  ***suddha-vipassanāyānika***  person  or  ***samatha-yānika***  person, wants  to  fulfil  the  purification  of  view  (***diṭṭhivisuddhi***),  he  must  discern  any  way  of meditation on four elements (***catu dhātu vavatthāna***), in brief account or detail account of that meditation subject, shown in ***Catudhātuvavatthāna kammaṭṭhāna***. (***Visuddhi*-2-222**). 

**PAGE-196** 

According to instruction of ***Visuddhi Magga Aṭṭhakathā***, either ***suddha vipassanā yānika***  person  who  prefers  to  discern  ***vipassanā***  practice  directly,  without  depending  on ***samatha*** practice, or ***samatha yānika*** person who prefers to discern corporeality previously, through which he wants to attain the purification of view, must practise the four elements meditation by any way of the followings:  

1) in brief account 
1) in detail account 
1) both in brief and detail accounts of that meditation subject previously. 

**2.8.a. General statement *Pāli Quotation* (*M-ṭī-1-369*)** 

- It should, generally, be preferable to take into to heart the mentality first as the 

object of ***vipassanā*** practice for ***samathā yānika*** person only. (***M-ṭī*-1-369**) 

According to this instruction of sub commentator, ***ṭīkā Sayadaw***, it can be decided that  discerning  on  the  mentality  previously,  during  taking  into  heart  ***sańkhāra  dhamma*** called the Noble Truth of suffering and the Noble Truth of cause of suffering, is for only ***samatha yānika*** person as a general. With an exception, a few ***suddha vipassanā yānikia*** persons  may  be  able  to  discern  the  mental  ***dhammas***  previously.  Similarly,  the  way  of discerning on the corporeal ***dhammas*** previously, is also instructed for only ***suddhavipassanā yānika*** person as a general. ***Samatha yānika***  person, however, if he prefers to discern the corporeality ***dhamma*** previously, is capable of the way as he likes. 

Both persons  of ***suddha  vipassanā  yānika***  and  ***samatha yānika***  should practise  the  four elements meditation previously because of the following reasons. 

**2.8.b. Reasons of why the meditation on corporeality previously for both two persons** 

There are 40 meditation subjects to develop concentration in ***samatha*** stage but only two  meditation  subjects,  i.e,  meditation  on  the  corporeality  (***rūpa  kammaṭṭhāna***)  and meditation  on  the  mentality  (***nāma  kammaṭṭhāna***),  in  ***vipassanā***  stage,  according  to  the commentaries of various ones. 

***Pāli Quotation* (*M-A*-1-280, *Abhi-A*-2-252) *Duvidhañhi kamaṭṭhānam* . . . *kathesi*.** 

There are only two kinds of meditation subjects in ***vipassanā*** stage, meditation on the corporeality  and  meditation  on  the  mentality.  It  is  also  known  as  the  discriminative knowledge of the corporeality (***rūpa pariggaha***) and the discriminative knowledge of the mentality  (***arūpa  pariggaha***).  When  the  Buddha  preached  the  way  how  to  practise  the meditation of the corporeality, the usual way is only the four elements meditation by means of in brief account or in detail account on it.  

**(*M-A-1-280, Abhi-A-2-252*)** 

**PAGE-197** 

According to this instructions found in commentaries, due to the Buddha preached only two ways of meditation on the corporeality, a brief account and a detailed account, both ***samatha yānika*** person who prefers to practise meditation of the corporeality, and ***suddha vipassanā yānika***  who  does  not   depend  on ***samatha*** practice,  must  discern  on  the  four elements  meditation  previously.  It  is  the  best  way  for  every  ***meditator***  by  following respectfully  with  the  Buddha’s  admonishments  which are  the  fruits  of  the  knowledge  of Omniscience (***sabbaññuta ñāņa***). A person discerns the corporeality, but not begins with the four elements meditation, with the result that it will be quite far to reach the field of the ultimate reality, preached by the Buddha , just like between the sky and the earth. 

According to ***Visuddhi Maga***, it is decided that the four elements meditation called ***Catudhātu  vavatthāna***,  belongs  to  some  kinds  of  meditation  subjects  which  give  rise  to neighbourhood concentration. (***Visuddhi*-1-107**). This kind of meditation subject is known as ***upacāra kammatthāna***, by which only neighbourhood concentration would be developed. Therefore  this  meditation  subject  includes  in  the  ***samatha***  stage  during  developing concentration by taking the object of four elements. Then ***suddha vipassanā yānika*** person and ***samatha yānika*** person, who want to the stage of the purification of view, must begin by practising on the four elements meditation. It, therefore, is essential for both ***samatha*** stage and  ***vipassanā***  stage.  It  is  necessary  to  explain  the  fact  that  what  kind  of  concentration developed by the four elements meditation is. 

In  the  ***Mahāsatipatthāna  Sutta***  the  Buddha  preached  how  to  practise  the  four elements meditation as follows. 

***Pāli Quotation* (M-1-73) one paragraph.** 

- ***Bhikkhus***!  In  the  next  way,  the  ***bhikkhu***  is  discerning  and  taking  into  heart  the characteristic of each element (***dhātu***), one by one (but not person, beings, ***jīva***, self) so as to see a such condition that “it is merely the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element, by the eye of wisdom on to this body situating with present position. (***M-1- 73***). 

**PAGE-198** 

Then it is instructed again in the ***Visuddhi Magga***, the fact that “the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element by which consisting between bones, sinews, fleshes, skins would be discerned by piercing the hand of analytical knowledge so many times repeatedly”. (***Visuddhi*-1-347**) 

* ***tassevan  vāyamamānassa  nacireneva  dhātuppabedāvabhāsana  paññā  pariggahito sabhāvadhammāramaņattā appanam appatto upacāramatto samādhi uppajjati***.  (***Visuddhi*-1-347**) 
- The  ***meditator***  who  strenuously  practices  in  that  way,  will  attain  only  neighbourhood concentration  (it  is  the  same  degree  of  true  neighbourhood  concentration  which  always appears just before the full concentration) which is unable to reach the full concentration really, because the object of the four elements meditation is the specific character of the four elements, so-called the nature of the ultimate corporeality. (***Visuddhi*-1-347**). 

It should be recognized the fact that the commentator of ***Visuddhi Magga*** used the term “the neighbourhood concentration” (***upacāra samādhi***) while the sub-commentator of ***Mahāṭīkā***  used  the  term  “the  momentary  concentration  (***khaņika  concentration***)  for  the nomenclature of concentration type produced by the four elements meditation. 

**2.8.C. The important notes** 

***Suddha vipassanā yānika*** person who wants to fulfil the purification of view must begin with the four elements meditation. The concentration of sensuous world (***kāmāvacara samādhi***) which becomes to the highest degree of concentration, through the object of the four great elements, is called “the neighbourhood concentration” in the sub commentary, while “the momentary concentration” in the sub-commentary as a synonym. Then the sub- commentator explained why the term “neighbourhood concentration” had been used in the commentary as follows: 

**PAGE-199** 

* ***Upacāra  samādhīti  ca  runhļī  vasena  veditabbam,  appanam  hiupicca  cārī  samādhi upacāra samādhi, appanā cettha natthi. Tādisassa pana samādhissa samānalakkhaņatāya evam vuttam***. (***Mahāṭī*-1-436**) 
- The concentration of the sensuous world, duced by taking the object of the four great elements, is termed “the neighbourhood concentration” by commentator and then this term is not direct usage but as a metaphor. Indeed, only the peak concentration of the sensuous world which usually occurs just before the full concentration (***appanā samādhi***), can be called the true neighbourhood concentration. There is no ability to produce the full concentration in the four elements meditation. However, the commentator used the term “ the neighbourhood concentration for type of concentration produced by this meditation subject due to the nature of the same degree of concentration which is true neighbourhood concentration, by means of ***sadisupacāra***, i.e,  metaphor for same condition. (***Mahātī*-1-436**). 

According to above explanation of ***Mahātīkā Sayadaw***, the concentration of sensuous world, which is occurring previously just before any kind of full concentration, can be called the neighbourhood concentration directly. The concentration of ***suddha vipassanā- yānika***, which is reaching to the highest degree, by means of taking the object of the four great elements, can be called the neighbourhood concentration indirectly, due to the same degree of concentration. That kind of concentration is termed “momentary concentration, directly by ***Mahātīkā*** Sayadaw. The reason why this term used is as follows. 

9. __The momentary concentration in *Samatha*__* __stage *Pāli Quotation* (*Visuddhi*-1-140, *Abhi-A*-1-160)__ 

The meaning of above ***Pāli*** quotation is as follows. 

There  are  five  kinds  of  the  pleasurable  interest  (***pīti***),  including  in  factors  of absorption (***Jhanańga***). 

1. ***Khuddikā pīti*** = this kind of “pleasurable interest” is capable of having goose-flesh only less powerful kind. 

**PAGE-200** 

2. ***Khaņikā pīti*** = It appears as a flash of lightning at each moment. 
2. ***Okkantikā pīti*** = It appears as tidal wave. 
2. ***Ubbegā pīti*** = this kind of pleasurable interest is capable of raising the body into sky, and very powerful kind. 
2. ***Phraņā pīti*** = It spreads into the whole body similar to leather bag, filled with air or a valley flowing with vast water. (It means that the corporeal units produced by mind with pleasurable interest spread out the whole body.) 

Those five kinds of pleasurable interest (***pīti***) becomes the pregnancy called situation of tranquillity of mind and mental concomitants (***citta passaddi*** & ***kāya passaddi***).  

When the pregnancy matured, it can fulfil tranquillity of mind and mental concomitants. Then tranquillity of mind and mental concomitants become the pregnancy called situation of happiness (***sukha***). When the pregnancy matured, it can fulfil three kinds of concentration, i.e, momentary concentration, neighbourhood concentration and full concentration.  (***Visuddhi*-1-140**; ***Abhi-A*-1-160**). 

There are three kinds of concentration, i.e., preliminary concentration (***parikamma samādhi***), neighbourhood concentration and full concentration in ***samatha stage***. Then the “preliminary”  concentration,  which  is  occurring  previously  just  before  neighbourhood concentration is called “the momentary concentration” in accordance with commentary. This usage is applied in the ***samatha*** stage for momentary concentration. 

By  referring  this  usage  of  commentary,  ***Mahāṭīkā  Sayadaw***  termed  “momentary concentration” for the concentration of sensuous world, which reaches to the highest degree, by  taking  the  object  of  four  great  elements,  directly.  In  the  commentary,  this  kind  of concentration is termed the neighbourhood concentration as in above mentioned. Therefore the usage of the commentary is a metaphor of same condition while that of sub-commentary (***Mahātīkā***), directly. These two usages are not contrary to each other. This is the explanation for  the  usage  of  synonyms  for  the  highest  degree  of  concentration  of ***suddha  vipassanā yānika*** person who takes the object of four elements. 

Similarly, the highest concentration of sensuous world, which is attained by some meditation  subjects,  like  the  recollection  on  the  Noble  Qualities  of  the  Buddha (***Buddhānussati***),  etc  …  can  also  be  called  by  two  terms,  i.e.,  the  momentary  and neighbourhood concentration. Then the momentary concentration in ***Vipassanā*** stage would be presented as follows. 

**PAGE-201** 
PAGE13
