PAGE135

In the above sermon too the instruction is that it must be kept firmly in mind that  if delight has been attached to 12 species of  *âyatana*, then the past is delighted in. 

How the Past is Not Enjoyed 

*nandim na sa*. *manvâneti*.  “*Evum vedano*.  R.  .*E* .*v* *um*.  *sañño*..   *Evum*.  *san*.*k* *hâro*.  *Evum*.  *Kathañca Bhikkhave atîtam*.  *nânvâgameti*, “*evum rûpo ahosim atîtamaddhânan*”*ti tattha* 

- . 

*viññâno ahosim atîtamaddh*.*â* *nan*”*ti tattha nandim na samnvâneti*.  *Evum kho bhikkhave  atîtam nâmanvâgameti* (*Ma*.-3: 226 – 227). 

`    `Bhikkhave …. In what way was the past not enjoyed? 

1. Delight in the past *rûpa dhamma*, the *nandî dhamma*, as **–** “The *rûpa* *dhamma* has arisen in the past” **–** has not appeared. 
1. “Such a feeling = *vedanâ dhamma* in the past, 
1. Such an awareness = *saññâ dhamma*, 
1. Such a dynamic groups of *cetasika sankhâra dhammas*, 
1. Such a mental quality = *viññâna dhamma*” will cause the formation of delight in the past (*vedanâ*-*saññâ*-*sankhâra*), *viññâna dhammas* has not arisen.  Bhikkhus ….  

`     `This is how the past is not enjoyed (*Ma*.3: 236). 

The Venerable Mahâkaccé has also explained how no enjoyment is seeked in the 

past. 

*Kathañca âvusso atîtam nânvâgameti*..   *Iti me cakkhu ahosi atîtamaddhânam*, *iti rûpâti*, *tattha na sandarâgappatibaddham hoti vuññânam*. , *na s*.*a* *ndarâgappatibaddhattâ* 

` `*viññânassa na tadabhinandati*, *na tadabhinandanto atîtam nânvâgameti* (*Ma*.-3: 236). 

My colleagues ….  In what ways is the past not always followed? 

The *nikanti viññâna* associated with longing for element of eye clearness and in material object, the *chandharâga*, had not arisen such as in the past I have had element of eye  clearness  in  this  way,  my  material  objects  have  been  this  way.   Because  of dissociation of this conscious (*nikanti*) *viññâna dhamma* with the clinging, *chandharâga*, one is not delighted in the element of eye clearness and material object.  If one is not delighted with the element of eye clearness and material object, then he is not delighted  in the past  (*Ma*.-3: 236). 

The same has been instructed to apply to the remaining *âyatana*s.  In this sermon, if there is enjoyment in the 12 *âyatana*s, then this means that the past is still enjoyed, and it should be remembered that if there is no enjoyment in the 12 *âyatana*s there will be no  delight in the past. 

The explanations given by the Buddha and the Venerable Mahâkaccé are that if there has been delight, the *nadîdhamma*, in the five-fold *khandhâ*s, *rûpa* and *nâma dham*- *ma*s called the 12 *âyatan*s, then the past will be clung to.  If *nadîdhamma*s have not arisen then it is clear that there is no pleasure in the past.  These are the *desanâ*s  which have 

instructed with emphasizing only on the exercise to be detached from the past *khandhâ*s and *âyatana*s*.*  It should be realized that these *desanâ*s instructed only to be detached, to be free from attachment to, the past *khandhâ*s, *âyatana*s or *tahnâ ditthi*.   These, however, do not mean that the past *khandhâ*-*âyatana*-*rûpa*-*nâma* are not to be taken as the object of meditation. 

Expectation of the Future 

*Kathañca bhikkhave anâgatam*.  *patikañkhati*? *“Evum*.  *rûpo siyam*.  *anâgatamaddhânan*”*ti* 

- .  .  .  .  . 

*tattha nandi*.*m*  *samanvâneti*.  *Evum vedano siyam*..   R.  *Evum sañño s*.*i* *yam*.  “*Evum viññâno siyam anâatamaddhânan*.*”* *ti tattha nandim samnvâneti*.  *Evum kho bhikkhave  anâgatam patikañkhati* (*MA*.-3: 227). 

Bhikkhave …. How is the future expected? 

1. Delight in the future *rûpa dhamma*, the *nandî dhamma*, as **–** “The *rûpa* *dhamma* is anticipated to arise in the future.”  
1. This kind of feeling in future = *vedanâ dhamma*.  R. 
1. Such an awareness = *saññâ dhamma*.  
1. *Cetasika sankhâra dhamma* which are subject to such changes. 
1. Such a consciousness = delight, *nandî dhamma*s, in the future *viññâna dhamma**       (*vedanâ*-*saññâ*-*sankhâra*) results when a wish is made for them. 

`  `Bhikkhus …. The longing for the future has been made in this way. 

`  `This is what the Buddha has expounded with regard to longing for the future. Again the Venerable Mahâkaccé has expatiated on the anticipation of the future in the following way. 

- . 

*Kathañca âvusso anâgatam patikañkhati*..  *Iti me cakkhu siyâ anâgatamaddhânam*, *iti rûpâti appatiladdhassa patilâbhâya cittam panidahati*, *c*. *etaso panidhânapaccayâ tada- nadati*, *tadabhinandati*, *tadabhinandanto anâgatam patikañkhati* (*Ma*.-3:237). 

My colleagues ….  In what way is the past longed for?  May the element of my eye clearness be so in future; may my corporeality be so.  The mind has been set in this way on the eye clearness element and corporeality which have yet to acquire.  The mind set in this way is the cause due which the awareness in the eye clearness element and corporeality  have  resulted.   If  there  is  delight  in  this  eye  clearness  element  and corporeality, then will be anticipation for the future.  (It has been admonished that the  same applies to the remaining *âyatana*s)  (*Ma*.-3:237). 

According to the *desanâ* admonished here — 

If a wish has been made in mind that in the future period and future life as to be a human of good deeds, a god of good deeds, and had made wishes after performance of *kusala* actions, then this means there is delight in the five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* of the human and of the god.  Note that if there is enjoyment for these, then there is anticipation for the future. 

**Not Anticipating the Future** 

*Kathañca bhikkhave anâgatam nappatikañkhati*.  “*Evum rûpo siyam anâgatamaddhâ- nan*”*ti tattha nandim na samanvâneti*.  *Evum vedano siyam*.  R.  *Evum sañño siyam*.  *Evum sankhâro siyam*.  “*Evum viññâno siyam anâgatamaddhânan*”*ti tattha nandim na  samanvâneti*.  *Evum kho bhikkhave anâgatam nappatikañkhati*(*Ma*.-3:227). 

Bikkhave …. In what way is the future not anticipated? 

Enjoyment, *nandî dhamma*, in the future corporeality as “I wish to have a human good looking material body in future” does not happen to arise in one again and again. 

Such an enjoyable feeling = wish to be one with *vedanâ*.  R. 

Such an awareness = wish to be one with *saññâ*. 

Wish to be one with such a *cetasika* and *sankhâra dhamma* groups subject to change. 

“Wish to be one with such an enjoyable consciousness = *viññâna* in future”, a delight in these future*   *viññâna dhamma* (*vedanâ*-*saññâ*-*sankhâra*) groups have  not been made again and again. 

Bhikkhus …. This how the future has not been anticipated (*Ma*.-3: 227). 

This is the *desanâ* expatiated by the Buddha, through his *mukhapâttha*, as an explanation of how the future is not anticipated.  With regard to non-anticipation of the  future, the Venerable Mahâkaccé has given the following explanation. 

*Kathañca âvusso anâgatam nappatikañkhati*.  *Iti me cakkhu siyâ anâgatamaddhânam*, *iti rûpâti appatiladdhassa patilâbhâya cittam nappanidahati*.  *Cetaso appanidhânapaccayâ  na tadabhinadati*, *na tadabhinandanto anâgatam nappatikañkhati* (*Ma*.-3: 237). 

My colleagues …. In what way is the future not anticipated?  The mind is not set on the eye clearness element not yet acquired as I wish my future eye clearness element be this way, material objects be like this.  Because of the non-committed mind as the  cause, there is no enjoyment in the future eye clearness element and material object.  If there is no delight in the future eye clearness element and material object, then the future will not be longed for or anticipated.  (A similar explanation was expatiated for the  remaining five pairs of *âyatana*s).  (*Ma*.-3: 237). 

Note again that with reference to the above *desanâ* expounded by the Omniscient Buddha and the explanations given by the Venerable Mahâkaccé, no longing for nor delight in the future five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* and the *rûpa*-*nâma*, called the twelve  *âyatana*s, as “Let me be it,” means no anticipation on the future. 

With regard to the above explanations and instructions, teacher of the book of meaning also has the given meaning of “**do not long for future**, **do not anticipate the  future**” as follows. 

***Atîta**nti atîte pañcakkhandhe*.  ***Nânvâgameyâ**ti tahnâditthîhi nânugaccheya*.   

***Napatikañkhe**ti tahnâditthihi na pattheya* (*Ma*.-*Ttha*.4: 170). 

` `The past refers to the five-fold *khandhâ* of the past (= 12 species of *âyatana*); do not long for the past means not to long for the past five-fold *khandhâ* (=  the *âyatana* 12  species) by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* as “I **–** **Mine = Let me be like this. Let me be like this**”**.**   

Do not anticipate for the future means not to long for the future five-fold *khandhâ* (= *âyatana* 12 species) by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* as “**I would like to be this. I would like to be this.**” 

**The Essence of the Sermon** 

The actual  sense of this pâli book of meaning is this. 

1. If attachment is made on the past five-fold *khandhâ* by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*, then it is longing for the past. 
1. If attachment is not made on past five-fold *khandhâ* by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*,  then means that the past is not longed for. 
1. If attachment is made on the future five-fold *khandhâ* by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*, then it is longing for the future. 
1. If attachment is not made on future five-fold *khandhâ* by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*,  then means         that the future is not longed for. 

This is the basic idea of the statement. 

1. Do not to long for the past means to meditate so as not be attached on the past five- fold *khandhâ* by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* and effort must be made not be so attached. 
1. Do not to long for the future means to meditate so as not be attached on the future five-fold *khandhâ* by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* and effort must be made not be so attached. 

`           `It should be accepted without reservation that this is what the *desanâ* really means. 

**Attraction to *Tahnâ*-*Ditthi* in the Present** 

The  Buddha  Sabbñusammâsambuddha  himself  has  expatiated  as  if  there  is *sakkâya ditthi* referred to as *attaditthi* = my life, my soul,  my *viññâna* and my self, attached either on the present five-fold *khandhâ* or on any one of these five, and if there is  attachment  as  I,  other,  male,  female,  individuality,  sentient  being,  human,  god, *byahmâ*, then attraction will be exerted on the five-fold *khandhâ* by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* (*Ma*,-3: 227). 

Bhikkhus …. In what way is attraction made on the present by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*? 

Bhikkhus …. In this world, worldlings, who are not used to seeing the *ariya*s, being incompetent in and unfamiliar with the *ariyâdhamma*, and not used to seeing the people of good deeds being incompetent in, unfamiliar with,  and unheard of the good  *dhamma*, are being attracted by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* in the following way. 

1. *Rûpa* is discerned as *atta*. 
1. (The remaining *khandhâ*s) Are discerned as possessing *atta*, 
1. Discerning as *rûpa* in *atta* and 
1. *Atta* in *rûpa*. 

Feeling as *vedanâ* is.  R. 

`          `Awareness as saññâ is.  R. 

`          `*Cetasika sankhâra dhamma* groups subject to change as.  R. 

1. Awareness = discern *viññâna* as *atta*. 
1. (The remaining *khandhâ*s) Are discerned as possessing *atta*. 
1. Discerning as *rûpa* in *atta* and 
1. *Atta* in *rûpa*. 

`         `Bhikkhus …. In this way attraction is made to the present *dhamma*s by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*  (*Ma*.-3: 227). 

The Venerable Mahâkaccé too has expounded as follow. 

*Kathañca âvusso paccuppannesu dhammesu samhîrati*.   

*Yañcâvusso cakkhu*, *ye ca rûpâ*.  *Ubhayametam paccuppannam*,  *tassamim ce paccuppanne chandarâgappatibaddham hoti viññânam*, *chandarâgappatibadhattâ  viññânassa tadabhinandanto paccuppannesu dhammesu samhîrati* (*Ma*.-3: 237). 

My colleagues …. In what way do *thanâ*-*ditthi* attract as “I, mine” in the present  *dhamma*s? 

My colleagues …. Eye clearness element (= *cakkhupasâda*) and *rûpa* object are a pair of the present.  Longing for the eye clearness element and *rûpa* object of the present = awareness connected with *chanda*-*râga* = *viññâna* may occur.  Then that eye clearness element and *rûpa*  object will  be  enjoyed  because  of the  awareness  = longing  of the *viññâna* = the state of being connected with the *chandarâga*.  If there is delight in the eye  clearness element and *rûpa* object, then there is attraction by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* to these present  *dhamma*s.  (The same phenomenon for the remaining five pairs of *âyatana*s have been expounded). 

**Distraction by *Tahnâ*-*Ditthi* in the Present** 

Bhikkhave ….  In what way do *tahnâ*-*ditthi* distract in the present? 

Bhikkhus …. In this world, *sâvaka*, the followers of the Buddha’s *desanâ*, who  are  used  to  seeing  the  *ariya*s,  being  competent  in  and  familiar  with  the *ariyâdhamma*, and used to seeing the people of good deeds, being competent in, familiar with  and having knowledge of the good *dhamma*, are being distracted by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* in  the following way. 

5. *Rûpa* is discerned not as *atta*. 
5. (The remaining *khandhâ*s) Are discerned as not possessing *atta*, 
5. Not discerning as *rûpa* in *atta* nor 
5. *Atta* in *rûpa*. 

Feeling as *vedanâ* is.  R. 

`          `Awareness as saññâ is.  R. 

`          `*Cetasika sankhâra dhamma* groups subject to change as.  R. 

5. Awareness = discern *viññâna* not as *atta*. 
5. (The remaining *khandhâ*s) Are discerned as not possessing *atta*. 
5. Not discerning as *rûpa* in *atta* nor 
5. *Atta* in *rûpa*. 

`                  `Bhikkhus …. In this way no attraction is made to the present *dhamma*s by  *tahnâ*-*ditthi* (*Ma*.-3: 227). 

*Kathañca âvusso paccuppannosu* *dhammesu na samhîrati*. 

*Yañcâvusso cakkhu*, *ubhayametam paccuppannam*,  *tassamim ce paccuppanne na chadarâgappatibaddham hoti viññânam*.  *Na chandarâgappatibaddhattâ viññânassa na tadabhinandati*, *na tadabhinandanto paccuppannesu dhammesu na samhîrati*  (*Ma*.-3:238). 

My colleagues …. In what way is no attraction made to the present *dhamma*s by  *tahnâ*-*ditthi*? 

My colleagues …. The eye clearness element and the *rûpa* object are a pair of the present.   Suppose  the  longing  for  present  eye  clearness  element  and  *rûpa*  object  = awareness  associated  with  *chanda*-*râga*  =  *viññâna*  does  not  arise.   Because  of  the awareness  =  longing  of  the  *viññâna*  =  being  dissociated  with  *chanda*-*râga*  result  in 

distraction of that eye clearness element and *rûpa* object.  If there is no delight in these two, then there is no attraction to the present *dhamma*s by means of *tahnâ*-*ditthi*.  (It has  been expatiated that the same applies to remaining five pairs of *âyatana*s). 

**The Meaning of the *Desanâ*** 

The meaning of the *desanâ* has been given by the teacher of the book of meaning  

as follows. 

*Tattha **samhîratî**ti vipassanâya abhâvato tahnâditthîhi âkatthiyati*.  ***Na samhîratî**ti  vipassanâya bhâvena tahnâditthîti âkatthiyati* (*Ma*.-*Ttha*.-4: 171 - 172). 

Because  *vipassanâ  ñâna* does not  arise in  the  present *dhamma*s =  due  to the *vipassanâ ñâna* being not apparent, there is an attraction exerted by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*.  Due to arising of the *vipassanâ ñâna* in the present *dhamma*s, there apparently is *vipassanâ ñâna* because of which no attraction can be exerted on the present *dhamma*s.*   

(*Ma*.-*Ttha*.- 4: 171 - 172). 

In accordance with the explanations given in the above, if *vipassanâ ñâna*  are arising on the present *dhamma*s, there can be no attraction by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* = there can be no *tahnâ*-*ditthi*.  If no *vipassanâ ñâna* arises on the present *dhamma*s, attraction by *tahnâ*- *ditthi* will be exerted = the *tahnâ*-*ditthi* will be arising.  Therefore, the Buddha himself has instructed in second *gâthâ* to be free from attraction by *tahnâ*-*ditthi*.  So as not to be attached by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* on the present five-fold *khandhâ* and *rûpanâma* *dhamma*s must be dissolved and discerned by *vipassanâ* via *aniccânupassanâ ñâna*, *dukkhânupassanâ ñâna*, *anattânupassanâ ñâna*, *nibbidânupassanâ ñâna*, *virâganupassanâ ñâna*, *nirodhâ- nupassanâ ñâna*, *patinissaggâ ñâna*, referred to as the seven *anupassanâ ñâna*, again and again. 

*Paccuppannañca yo dhammam*, *tattha tattha vipassati*. 

*Asamhîram asamkuppam*, *tam viddvâ manubayûhaye*. 

(The meaning of this stanza is given at the beginning of Baddekaratta suttana). 

The explanations have also been given by *atthakathâ*-*tîkâ* as follows. 

***Attha tatthâ**ti paccuppannampi dhammam yattha yattheva ca nam aniccânupassanâdîhi sattahi anupassanâhi yo vipassani*, *araññâdîsu vâ tattha tattheva vipassati* (*Ma*.-*Ttha*.- 4:  170). 

***Yattha yatthâ**ti yassamim yassamim khane*, *yassamim yassamim vâ dhammapuñje  uppannam*, *tam sabbampi asesetvâ* (*a*.-*Tî*.-3: 366). 

The following is what these *atthakathâ*-*tîkâ* mean. 

Concentration is repetitively made on the present five-fold *khandhâ*s as 

1. At the moment of arising, 
1. In places like forest etc., 
1. Those  groups  of  dhamma,  as  they  are,  are  entirely  discerned  by *aniccânupassanâ* etc. of the seven *anupassanâ ñâna*.   The *vipassanâ ñâna*, 

concentrating  on  the  object,  is  never  attracted  by  *tahnâ*-*ditthi*  of  the  *kilesâ*s.   This *vipassanâ ñâna* is indestructible by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* of the *kilesâ*s.  Then the *vipassanâ ñâna* is  again  discerned  =  culture  that  *vipassanâ  ñâna*.   Discernment  in  this  way  is  also discerning  on  the  five-fold  *khandhâ*  =  *manodvârika  mahâkusala  jovîthi  citta*  led  by *vipassanâ ñâna* in  turn is concentrated so that the object of concentration and concentra- ting *ñâna* as a pair is being discerned. 

If *vipassanâ ñâna* is increased by discerning this way the opposing *kilesâ* of *raga* etc. cannot destroy it.  A man of wisdom must discern repeatedly on the *vipassanâ ñâna*  which is indestructible by the opposing *kilesâ* of *tahnâ*-*ditthi* etc. 

This description of indestructibility of *vipassanâ ñâna* is just a *pariyâya*.  As the *vipassanâ ñâna* can only momentarily eradicate the opposing *kilesa*s, it can remain indes- tructible only momentarily. 

In fact it is the  *nibbâna dhamma*, named the  *asankhata dhâtu*,  which certainly  remains indestructible by means of the opposing *kilesa*s.  Therefore, a man of wisdom must exercise on the *vipassanâ bhâvanâ* via *vipassanâ ñâna* to ultimately attain path knowledge and fruit knowledge.  Then with the path knowledge so acquired, enter the fruit absorption (*phalsammâpatti*) state repeatedly taking the *asankhata dhâtu*, the  element of peacefulness, the *nibbâna* as the object.  This is the meaning the second *gâtha*. 

**Instructions Acquired** 

If the above two *gâthâ*s are taken in brief, the Buddha has instructed that – 

1. Not to have *tahnâ*-*ditthi* on the past five-fold *khandhâ*, 
1. Not to have *tahnâ*-*ditthi* on the future five-fold *khandhâ*, 
1. Not to have *tahnâ*-*ditthi* on the present five-fold *khandhâ*. 

It has also been instructed that the present five-fold *khandhâ* are repetitively concentrated, not to have *tahnâ*-*ditthi* on them, by means of *aniccânupassanâ* etc. of the  seven *anupassanâ ñâna*. 

If so a question arises as to how to practise in such a way that one has no *tahnâ*- *ditthi* on the five-fold *khandhâ*s of the past, future and present.  The answer for this is as given below. 

**Extracts from Patisambhidâmagga Pâli** 

*Katham atîtânâgatapaccuppannânam dhammânam sañkhipitvâ vavatthâne paññâ  sammane ñânam –* 

*Yam kañci rûpam atîtânâgatapaccuppannam acchattam vâ bhahiddhâ vâ olârika vâ sukhumam vâ yam dûre vâ santike vâ*, *sabbam rûpam aniccato vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam*.  *Dukkhato vavatthapeti ekam sammanam*, *anattato vavatthapeti ekam* 

` `*sammanam.*  

*Yâ kâci vedanâ*.  R.  *Yâ kâci saññâ*.  *Ye keci sankhârâ*.  *Yam kañci viññânam atîtânâgata- paccuppannam ijjhattam vâ bhahiddhâ vâ olârikam vâ sukhumam vâ hînam vâ panîtam* 

*vâ yam dûre santike vâ*.  *Sabbam viññânam aniccato vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam*. *Dukkho vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam*,  *attato vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam*  (*Patisam*.: 51). 

Why is the knowledge that can analyze in brief the past, future and present *dhamma*s called the *sammasana ñâna*?  The past, the future, the present, *ijjhatta*, *bahiddha*, *olârika*, *sukhuma*,  *hîna*,  *panîta*,  *dûra*,  *santika*  which  are  all  *rûpa*s,  and  individually  noted  as *anicca* is an analytical notion = called *sammasana*.  Individually noted as *dukkha* is another analytical notion  =  called  *sammasana*.  Individually noted as  *anatta*  is still  

another analytical notion = called *sammasana* (*Patisam*.: 51). 

*Tasamâ esa yam **atîtam** rûpam*, *tam yasamâ atîteyeva khînam*, *nayimam bhavum sampat- tanti aniccam kayatthena*.  *Yam **anâgatam** rûpam anantarabhave nibbattissati*, *na tato param bhavum gamissatîti aniccam khayatthena*.  *Yam **paccuppannam** rûpam*, *tampi  idheva khîyati*, *na ito gicchatîti aniccam khayatthena* (*Vi.*-2: 245; *Patisam*.-*Ttha*.-1: 229). Therefore, this meditating monk discerns in this way. – 

1. A certain ***atita rûpa** dhamma* did exist  that, however, perished away in the past and never reaching the present life.  Due to this nature of perishing and dissolving away, it is discerned as *anicca*. 
1. A certain ***anâgata rûpa** dhamma* will arise in the future that will perish away in the future, but will never continue into next future. Because of this nature of perishing and dissolving away, it is discerned as *anicca*. 
1. A certain ***paccuppanna rûpa*** *dhamma* does exist that, however, perishes away in the present, but will never continue into another life. Due to this nature of perishing  

`      `and dissolving away, it is discerned as *anicca* (*Vi.*-2: 245; *Patisam*.-*Ttha*.-1: 229). 

[**Note**.  It has been expatiated to discern on the *vedanâ*, *saññâ*, *sankhâra*, *viññâna* etc. of the four-fold *nâmakhandhâ*s, the 12 *âyatanas*, 18 *dhâtus* and the 12 characters of *paticca samuppâda* in a way similar to that applied for the  *rûpakkhandhâ*.   See  *Patisam*.: 51-52.] 

*Evum sankhâra annatto passantassa **ditthisamugghâtanam** nâma hoti*.  *Aniccato passantassa **mânasamugghâtanam** nâma hoti*.  *Dukkhato passantassa **nikantipariyâdânam** nâma hoti*.  *Iti ayam vipassanâ anattano anattano tthâne yeva  titthatîti* (*Visuddhi*-2:264). 

In this way in the *santâna* of the one who understands the *sankhâra dhamma*s as the  *anatta*,  ***ditthisamugghâtna***  =  distraction  from  *ditthi*  appears.  When  one  who understands the *sankhâra dhamma*s as the *anicca*, ***mânasamugghâtana*** = distraction  from *mâna* appears. When one who understands the *sankhâra dhamma*s as the *dukkha*, ***nikantipariyâdâna*** = dissolution of *tahnânikanti* appears.  Note that each *vipassanâ* is  related to its corresponding character (*Visuddhi*-2:264). 

Here  explanation  of  Mahâtîkâsayâdaw  is  briefly  described.   (For  detail  see Mahâtîkâ vol. II, pp. 415 – 416; Nibbâgâminipatipadâ, vol. V, in section on Sammâ- sana ñâna, pp. 152 – 153). 

Although *anattânupassanâ ñâna* can distract *ditthi*, it is not this *ñâna* alone which can do so.  Only when  supported by the force of the *aniccânupassanâ ñâna* and *dukkânupassanâ ñâna*, based on the powerful *upanissaypaccaya*, the *anattânupassanâ ñâna* becomes sharp, clean and powerful.  Then it can dissociate itself from clinging to  the *ditthi*.   

Similarly even though *anattânupassanâ ñâna* can distract clinging to *mâna*, it is not this *ñâna* alone which can do so.  Only when  supported by the force of the *aniccânupassanâ  ñâna*  and  *dukkânupassanâ  ñâna*,  based  on  the  powerful *upanissaypaccaya*, the *anattânupassanâ ñâna* becomes sharp, clean and powerful.   Then it can dissociate itself from the clinging to the *mâna*.   

*Aniccasaññâ bhâvetabbâ asamimânasamugghâtâya* = the Buddha has instructed that for the sake of detaching from the clinging on to the  *asamimâna*,  meditate on the  *aniccasaññâ*  (*Mahâtî*.-2: 416). 

Again although *dukkhânupassanâ ñâna* can dissolve the *nikanti*,* the clinging to *tahnâ*, it is not this *ñâna* alone which can do so. Only when  supported by the force of the  *aniccânupassanâ  ñâna*  and  *anattânupassanâ  ñâna*,  based  on  the  powerful *upanissaypaccaya*, the *dukkhânupassanâ ñâna* becomes sharp, clean and powerful.   Then it can dissociate itself from the clinging on to the *tahnâ*.   

Since the clinging to *tahnâ* cannot be detached by *aniccânupassanâ* alone nor to *mâna* by *dukkhânupassanâ* alone nor to *ditthi* by *anattânupassanâ* alone, *vipassanâ* exercise must be made on each of the three general characters taken alternately  as the object.  In discerning this way, priority may be given to *aniccalakkhanâ* if need be.   The same applies to *dukkhalakkhanâ* and *anattalakkhanâ*. 

Because  of  *vipassanâ*  exercise  by  recollection,  the  *anattânupassanâ  ñâna* becomes  sharper,  clearer,  more  penetrative,   effective,  accumulated  and  powerful enough to dissolve the clinging to *atta* by support of the *aniccânupassanâ ñâna* and *dukkhânupassanâ ñâna*.  Then this *anattânupassanâ* is powerful enough to demolish  the clinging to *attaditthi*. 

At  a  corresponding  time  the  *aniccânupassanâ  ñâna*  becomes  sharper,  clearer, more penetrative,  effective, accumulated and powerful enough to dissolve the clinging to *atta* by support of the  *dukkhânupassanâ ñâna* and *anattânupassanâ*.  Then this  *aniccânupassanâ ñâna*  is powerful enough to demolish the clinging to *mâna*. 

At a corresponding time the *dukkhânupassanâ ñâna* becomes sharper,  clearer, more penetrative,  effective, accumulated and powerful enough to dissolve the clinging  to *atta* by support of the *aniccânupassanâ ñâna* and *anattânupassanâ ñâna*.  Then this *dukkhânupassanâ ñâna* is powerful enough to demolish the clinging to *tahnâ*  (see 

*Mahâtî*.-2: 415 – 416). 

**The Power of *Lokiyabhâvanâ*** 

*Lokiyabhavanâya hi kâye pahînam na vedanâdîsu pahînam hoti*.  *Yadipi na pavatteya*, *na **ekattha pahînam sesesupi pahînam hotî**ti maggasatipatthâbhâvanam*, *lokiya- bhâvanâya vâ sabbattha appavattimattam sandhâya vuttam* (*Ma*.-*Tî*.-1: 347). 

The  power  of  *lokuttarâmaggasatipatthânabhâvana*  and  that  of   *lokiyasatipatthâ- nabhâvanâ* are not similar.  As mediator is exercising *vipassanâ* on the *paramattha* objects such as *kâya*, *vedanâ*, *ciita, dhamma* etc.,* along with culturing their causes, he arrives at a stage about to attain the *ariyamagga*.  At that instant the meditator can concentrate on any of *kâya*, *vedanâ*, *ciita, dhamma* in the process of *vipassanâ* and still can acquire *ariyamagga*.  If *ariyamagga* is attained while concentrating on the *rûpa* *dhamma*, named *kâya*,  then it can disintegrate and  annihilate not only the *tahnâ* and *mâna* clinging to the *rûpa dhamma*, but the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clinging on to the *vedanâ*, *citta*, and *dhamma*.  Remember that the same thing happens in exercising  *vipassanâ* on the *vedanâ*, *citta*, and *dhamma*.  The *lokuttara ariyamagga dhamma*s are, however, the dhammas which can arise only when supported by the force of powerful  vipassanâ nanas such as *upanissaya* and *paccayasatti* bases. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  *lokiyasatipatthâna  bhâvanâ*  is  not  that  powerful.   If *vipassanâ* exercise is made on the *rûpa dhamma*, named *kâya*, as the  object, then *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to this *dhamma* can be dissolved momentarily.  This *kâyânupassanâ satipatthâna bhâvanâ* cannot disintegrate *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to *vedanâ*, *citta* and *dhamma*.  It must be reminded that a similar situation occurs when  discerning on the *vedanâ*, *citta* and *dhamma*. 

Therefore, in the case of *lokiyasatipatthânabhâvanâ*, *vipassanâ* exercise is made on the *kâya* so as to dissolve the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to the *kâya*.  The exercise is made on the *vedanâ* so as to dissolve the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to the *vedanâ*.* The *vipassanâ* exercise is made on the *citta* so as to disintegrate the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to the *citta*.* The *vipassanâ* exercise is made on the *dhamma*s so  as to dissolve the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to the *dhamma*. 

As a matter of fact, *kâya*, *vedanâ, citta* and *dhamma* are the five-fold *upâdânak*- *khandhâ*.  So, to annihilate the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to the present five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*, meditation is made on the present *upâdâkkhandhâ* as an object. To annihilate the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* clung to the past five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*, meditation is made on the past *upâdâkkhandhâ* as an object. To annihilate the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi* going to be clung to the future five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*, meditation is made on the future *upâdâkkhandhâ* as an object.  This the method of practicing for eradication of the *tahnâ*, *mâna* and *ditthi*  clinging to the past, future and present five- fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*s.   

Therefore the following instructions are achieved from the above. 

1. To be free from *tahâ*-*ditthi* attached to present five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* the *vipassanâ* exercise is made on present five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*. 
1. To  be  free  from  *tahâ*-*ditthi*  attached  to  past  five-fold  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  the *vipassanâ* exercise is made on past five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*. 
1. To be free from *tahâ*-*ditthi* attached to future five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* the  

`       `*vipassanâ* exercise is made on future five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*. 

As explained in Section on the *Paccakkha ñâna* and *Anvaya ñâna*, as to whether *paccakkha ñâna* or *anvaya ñâna* is employed in discerning on the past and future, the Buddha has expounded it to be *nâmarûpapariccheda ñâna* to *attapaccakkha ñâna*.  With reference to this – 

*Pubbabhâge vipassanâñânena sammasanvasena*.  R.  *Sulu attapaccakkhena ñânena passati* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 181) 

What it means is that in the *vipassanâ* prior to *ariyamagga* the 12 phenomena of the  five-fold  *upâdânakkhandhâ*,  existing  as  the  past,  future  and  present  etc.,  are discerned analytically, *samâsana*, taking them as the object, by the power of which they are well discerned, well understood and well realized.  These are acquired via *attapaccakkha ñâna*, called *vipassanâsammâditthi*. (for discerning by *Anvaya ñâna* see  section on Vipassanâ on pp    ) 

If in deed *vipassanâ* exercise is made on the past and future *khandhâ*s to be from the *tanhâ*-*ditthi* attached to these. If so, which descriptions in this Baddekaratta suttana  instruct for *viapassanâ* meditation on the past and future?  The answer is as follows. 

1. *Atîtam nânvâgameya* =  The past must not be followed by with *tahnâ*-*ditthi*, 
1. *Nappatikañkhe anâgatam* = The future must not be anticipated with *tahnâ*-*ditthi*. 

Note that these are instructions to exercise *vippasanâ* on past and future *khandhâ*s so as to be free from attachment on the past and future *khandhâs*.  Only by destruction of *kilesâ* aggregates by virtue of *vipassanâ* knowledge (the Path Knowledge) referred to as *nibbedhika* knowledge, which is endowed this power, can these aggregates be eradicated.  It must be noted that they cannot be disintegrated without discerning on the past and the future. 

The *tahnâ*-*ditthi* clung on the past and future will never cease without concen- trating on the past and future.  Meditation is made on the present *khandhâs* to free oneself from the *tahnâ*-*ditthi* attached on the present *khandhâ*s.  Similarly meditation is made on the past and future *khandhâs* to free oneself from the *tahnâ*-*ditthi* attached on the past and  future *khandhâ*s.  Read the following *suttana*s for further information. 

***Kâlattayaanicca* (*Dukkha* - *Annata*)  Suttana** 

*Rûpam bhikkhave aniccam atîtânâgatam*, *ko pana vâdo paccuppanassa*.  *Evum passam bhikkhave sutavâ ariyasâvako atîtassamin rûpassamim anapakkho hoti*, *anâgatam rûpam nâbhinandati*, *paccuppannassa rûpassa nibbidâya virâgâya nirodhâya patipanno hoti.* R. *nâbhinandati*, *paccuppannassa rûpassa nibbidâya virâgâya nirodhâya patipanno hoti.* R 

*Rûpam bhikkhave dukkham atîtânâgatam*, *ko pana vâdo paccuppanassa*.  *Evum passam bhikkhave sutavâ ariyasâvako atîtassamin rûpassamim anapakkho hoti*, *anâgatam rûpam  nâbhinandati*, *paccuppannassa rûpassa nibbidâya virâgâya nirodhâya patipanno hoti.* R 

*Rûpam bhikkhave anattam atîtânâgatam*, *ko pana vâdo paccuppanassa*.  *Evum passam bhikkhave sutavâ ariyasâvako atîtassamin rûpassamim anapakkho hoti*, *anâgatam rûpam  nâbhinandati*, *paccuppannassa rûpassa nibbidâya virâgâya nirodhâya patipanno hoti. Vedanâ aniccâ*.      R.  *Dukkhâ*.   R.  *Anattâ*.  R.  

*Saññâ aniccâ*.        R.  *Dukkhâ*.  R.  *Anattâ*.  R. 

*Sankhâra aniccâ*.   R.  *Dukkhâ*.  R.  *Anattâ*.  R. 

*Viânam aniccam*.   R.  *Dukkhâ*.  R.  *Anattâ*.  R.   (*Sam*.-2: 17-18). 

*Navame **ko pana vâdo paccuppannassâ**ti paccuppannahmi kathâva kâ anicca- meva  tam*.   *Te  kira  bhikkhu  atîtânâgatam  aniccanti  sanlakkhattvâ  paccuppanne kilamimsu*,  *atha  nesam  ito  atîtânâgatepi*  “*paccuppannam  aniccan*”*ti  vuccamâne byjjhisantîti ajjhâsayam viditvâ sattâ puggalajjhâsayena imam desam desesi* (*Sam*.-*Ttha*.- 

2: 242). 

*Dasamekâdasamâni **dukkham anattâ**ti padehi visesetvâ tathârûpeneva puggalejjâsayena  kathitâni* (*Sam*.-*Ttha*.-2: 242). 

*Yadi atîtânâgatam etarahi anattibhâvato aniccam*,  *paccuppannampi tadâ natthîti **ko pana vâdo** tassa aniccâya*, ***paccuppannahmi kathâva kâ** udayabbayaparicchannattâ* 

` `*tassa*.  *Vuttam hetam* “*nibbattâ ye ca titthanti*, *âragge sâsapûpamâ*”*ti* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.2: 213). Bhikkus …. *Rûpa* which is the past and future is the *anicca* (*dukkha*. *anatta*).  

And the present *rûpa* is not an exception.  Bikkhus …. The nature of *anicca* (of *dukkha* and of *anatta*), realized by own knowledge referred to as *âgamasuta*, knowledge via practice  referred  to  as  *adhigamasuta*,  are  possessed  by  followers  *sâvaka*s  (or *ariyasâvaka*s). They do not linger on to the past *rûpa* nor have enjoyment or anticipation for  the  future  *rûpa*.   They  practice  on  the  present  *rûpa*  to  be  relieved  of  interest, attachment and for acquirement of, its dissolution.  (Note that the same applies to *vedanâ*  etc.)  (*Sam*.2: 17 – 18). 

These bhikkhus have already analytically understood the past and future *rûpa*s (*vedanâ*, *saññâ*, *sankhâra*, *viññâna*) as *anicca* (as *dukkha*, as *anatta*), and on the present *rûpa*s  (*vedanâ*,  *saññâ*,  *sankhâra*,  *viññâna*) they  become  tired  of,  and  disinterested  in 

them.  Then the bhikkhus are instructed by the Buddha that from the present to the past and future are all *anicca*.  Following this admonition, as the Buddha already knows the *ijjâsayadhâtu* by which these bhikkhus could analytically realized the fact that the present *rûpa* (*vedanâ*, *saññâ*, *sankhâra*, *viññâna*) is the *aniica* (*dukkha*, *anatta*), this *desanâ* was  given corresponding to the *ajjhâsaya* wish of the believers (*Sam*.-*Tth*a.-2: 242).  

Suppose the past and future *khandhâs* are *anicca* because of the fact that do not they exist in the present,  the present *khandhâs* would be more so (*anicca*, *dukkha* and *anatta*) as they did not and would not exist in the past and future too.  This is because being present of the present *khandhâ*s is divided as arising and perishing phases by means of *udayabbaya*. – “*Nibbattâ ye ca ti*.*t*.*t* *hanti*, *âragge sâsapûmâ* = these *khandhâ*s exist as distinct appearance of mustard seed.s  on the sharp edge of a chisel” (*Khu*.-7: 32) was the  instruction. –  Note it this way (*Sam*.-*T*. *î*.-2: 213). 

To free oneself from attachment and clinging to the  past  and  future  *khandhâ*s,  *vipassanâ* must be exercised on these *khandhâ*s of the past and future. 

**The Meaning of the Present in Baddekaratta Suttana** 

Here the meaning of the present described in Baddekaratta suttana division into the past-future-present of the five-fold *khandhâs* in the doctrines will be given.  First, the  opening of the Atthasâlinî atthakathâ. 

*Paccuppannañca nâmetam tividham khanapaccuppannam*, *santatipaccuppannam*, *addhâpaccuppannañca*.  *Ekadvisantativârapariyâpa**nnam santatipaccuppanam***.  R. *Ekabhavaparicchanam pana **addâpaccuppannam** nâma*.  *Yam sandhâya **baddekaratta- sutte –** “yo câ vuso mano*, *ye ca dhamma*, *ubhayametam paccuppannam*,  *tasamim ce* 

*paccuppanne chandarâgapatibaddham hoti viññânam*, *chandarâgapatibaddhattâ viññâ- nassa tadabhinandanti*, *tadabhinandato paccuppannesu dhammesu samhîratî*”*ti vuttam*.  *Santatipaccuppannañcatta atthakathâsu âgatam*, *addhâpaccuppane sutte (Abhi*.-*Ttha.-*1:  

445). 

The  *paccuppam* object is of three kinds as follows.* 

1. *Khana paccuppam* 
1. *Santati paccuppam* 
1. *Addhâ paccuppam* 
1. Of these three, the formative stage, corresponding to various causes, by *upâda*-*tthî*- *bhañga* = *citta*-*cetasikka* *dhamma* groups, which are at the arising-static-perishing away phases, are *khanapaccuuppanna*. 
1. The processes of *rûpa* and *nâma* are called *santati*.  Included in the *rûpasantati* process arising as a result of one *utu* and one *ahâra*, two *utu* and two *ahâra*, and the *citta* and *cetasika nâma dhamma* groups coincident with one and  two thought processes, are *santatipaccuppana*.  
1. The *rûpanâma* distinguished within a certain existence is the *addhâpaccuppanna*.  Referring to this addhâpaccuppanna the Venerable Mahâkaccé has admonished in  

`      `the __*Mahâkaccâna* – *Baddekaratta suttana*__* as follows.*__  

“My colleague bhikkhus …. A certain *citta* referred to as mental clear element does exist as do certain *dhamma* object groups.  This *mana*-*dhamma* object as a pair is the  *addhâpaccuppanna*.   Suppose  the  *viññâna*,  associated  with  and  attached  to  the longing  *ragachandhâ*,  arises,  then  because  of  the  association  of  this  mental  property *viññâna* with longing *chandarâga*, that *mana*-*dhamma* object will be clung to (by that individual).  One who is so delighted in *mana*-*dhamma* object will be attracted to present  

*dhamma*s by the *tahnâ*-*ditthi* (*Ma*.-3: 237). 

Among these three kinds of present, the *santatipaccuppanna* is described in the  Commentary, and the *addhâpaccuppanna* in B**addekaratta suttana** (*Abhi*-*Ttha*.-1: 445).            Relevant to the above Pâli and Commentary, note that the present (*paccuppanna*), described in the **Baddekaratta suttana** refers to all five-fold *khandhâ* (the 12 *âyatana*s) appearing throughout the existence extending from the five-fold *patisandhekhandhâ* to the five-fold *cutikhandhâ*.  Therefore in these *addhâpaccuppanna dhamma*s are included not only the five-fold *khandhâ* that is formed today, but also those of yesterday and of the day before yesterday etc. up to the five-fold *patisandhekhandhâ* throughout the life of an individual.  In the same way, not only the five-fold *khandhâ* that will arise today, but those arising tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, coming month, year and until death also.  It should be noted that the meaning of the present used here is different from that used in  everyday language. 

The consciousness, the *viññâna* which is the wishful clinging attached to the six object or five-fold *khandhâ* in association with *chandarâga* =  it is difficult for arising of *mana*  on  the   *khanapaccuppanna  dhamma*s  which  have  attained  *khanattaya*,  called *upâda-tthî-bhañga*, in knowledge and  which have acquired vision at *paramatta* level. The *tahnâ*-*ditthi* are most likely to occur on the *rûpa*-*nâma* five-fold *khandhâ dhamma*s, called *addhâpaccuppanna*, designated by a certain existence.  For this reason the Com- mentators have explained that the *paccuppanna* in Baddekaratta suttanas are just the five- fold *khandhâ rûpa*-*nâma dhamma*s in a *bhava* designated by a certain existence.  These explanations, however, are made only in light of ***suttantapariyâyana* method**, not the ***abhidhammanissena* method.**  Therefore,  the concept of the *paccuppanna* is also given  in the light of  *suttantapariyâyana* and *abhidhammanissena* methods.   

**Designation of the Past, Future and Present** 

*Yam kañci rûpam atîtamnâgatapaccuppannam ijjhattam vâ bahiddhâ vâ olârikam vâ hînam vâ panîtam vâ yam dûre santike vâ*, *tadekajjham abhisamyûhitvâ ayam vuccati rûpakkhandho*.  *Yâ kâci vedanâ*.  *Yâ kâci saññâ*.  *Ye keci sankhâra*.   *Yam kañci viññâ- nam atînâgatapaccuppannam*.  R.  *Abhisañkhipitvâ* *ayam vuccati viññânakkhandho*  

(*Abhi*.-2: 1 – 10). 

*Idam pana atîtânâgatapaccuppannam nâma suttantapariyâyato abhidhammaniddesatoti duvidham*.  *Tam suttantaparoyâye bhaven paricchanam*.  *Patisandhito hi patthâya* 

*atîtabhavesu nibbattam rûpam anantarabhave vâ nibbattam hotu kappakotisatasahassa-*

*mattake vâ*.  *Sabbam anâgatameva nâma*.  *Cutipatisandhiantare pavattarûpam  paccuppannam nâma* (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 7). 

**Translation of the Above Pâli** 

There  are  the  *rûpa  dhamma*s  of  past-future-present  durations,  all  the  *rûpa dhamma*s  of  *ijjhattasantâna*,  *bahiddhasantâna*,  gross  *olârika*  nature,  subtle  *sukhuma* nature, lower and higher levels, the distant (from consciousness) *dûrarûpa*, the near (the 

consciousness) *santirûpa*.  These 11  kinds of  *okâsa* = indicative of the locality, that which make all the *rûpa*s subject to change, the 11 kinds which are grouped in brief by way of *ruppalakkhanâ*, of all the *rûpadhamman*s = are all called *rûpakkhandhâ*.  (N.B.  The same holds true for the *nâmakhandhâs*) (*Abhi*.-2: 1: 10). 

It must be noted that, according to this Pâli, all the *rûpa* *dhamma*s existing as 11  kinds are called *rûpakkhandhâ*. 

**The *Suttanta Pariyâya* Way** 

*Pariyâya* refers to that which has changed from the *Paramatthasabhâvadhamma*.  It has named as *suttanta pariyâya* way because the *suttana desanâ* is *pariyâya desanâ*.  In the *abhidhammâ*, it has been expounded as “*phassa-vedanâ*” etc., and such an expatiation  has been given as”*abhidhammaniddesa*.”  

This past, future and present *rûpa* are of two kinds: 

1. *Suttantapariyâya*  which  has  changed  from  *paramatthasabhâvadhamma*  =  the *suttanadesanâ* way, 
1. Determined in the *abhidhammâ* and expatiated as *abhidhammaniddesa* = *abhi*- 

`       `*dhammadesanâ* way. 

In the *suttantapariyâya* which has changed from *paramatthasabhâvadhamma* the past-future-present *rûpa*s delineated by an existence.  The following is how it is deli- neated. 

1. From *patisandhe* to all the *rûpa*s that have existed in the past – be it in the second 

life in the past, the life in the *asañkhata* period – are the *rûpa*s of the past. 

2. From this *cutibhava* to the *rûpa*s to be formed in the future life, be it formed in   

the in second past existence or the life in the *asañkhata* period, are all the future *rûpa*s. 

3. The *rûpa*s, formed during the existence spanning from this *bhava cuti* to this        *bhava patisandhe*, are all *paccuppanna* *rûpa*s (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 7). 

**The Abhidhammaniddesa Way** 

*Abhidhammaniddesa pana khanena paricchannam*. *Tayo hi rûpassa khanâ uppâdo tthiti bhañgoti*.  *Ime tayo khane patvâ niruddham rûpam samantaraniruddham vâ hotu atîte kappakotisatasahassamatthake vâ*, *sabbam atîtemeva nâma*.  *Tayo khane asampattam rûpam etacittakkhanamattena vâ asampatam hotu anâgate kappakotisatasahassa mattake vâ*, *sabbam anâgatemeva nâma*.  *Ime tayo khane sampattam rûpam pana paccuppannam* 

*nâma*.  *Tattha kañcâpi idam suttantabhâjanîyam*, *evum santepi abhidhammaniddeseneva  atîtânâgatapaccuppannarûpam nidditthanti veditabbam* (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 7) *Abhidhammaniddesa* = In *abhidhamma desanâ*, the past, future and present are  

divided by moment.  The following is how it is divided. 

The momentary moment of *rûpa dhamma* are of three kinds: 

1. The arising *upâdakhana*, 
1. The static *tthîkhana*, and 
1. the perishing away *bhañkhana*. 

These are the three *khanas*. 

1. The *rûpa* which  has ceased after arriving at these three *khana*s has perished, there being no other alternative (= there is no other *rûpa*), be it that which has already ceased or be it that which had ceased in the past of *asañkhata* period; and any *rûpa*s that have already ceased are all that of the past. 
2. The *rûpa* which has not yet arrived at the three *khana*s, be it the *rûpa* which has not arrive even at a certain *cittakhana*, be it the *rûpa* which will be formed in a future of an *asañkh ata* period, any *rûpa* which has not yet arrived at the three  *khana*s still belong to the future. 
2. All the *rûpa*s which have, and still are, at the three *khana*s are the *paccuppanna*  

`      `*rûpas*.  It should be known this way (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 7). 

**A Fact that Should be Understood.** 

*Tattha kañcâpi idam suttantabhâjanîyam*, *evum santepi abhidhammaniddeseneva  atîtânâgatapaccuppananrûpam nidditthanti veditabba,* (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 7). ***Kañcâpî**tiâdisu ayamadippâyo*  –  *suttantabhâjanîyatthâ* “*atîtam nânvâgameyâ*”*tiâdisu* (*Ma*.-3: 266).  *Addhâvasena atîtâdibhâvova vutto*, *tathâ idhâpi niddisitabbo siyâ*.  *Evum santepi suttantabhâjanîyampi abhidhammadesanâyeva suttante vuttadhammevicinitvâ vibhajanavasena pavattâti abhidhammaniddeseneva  atîtâdibhâvo nidditthoti* (*Mûlatî*-2: 6). 

***Baddekarattasuttâ**dîsu viya atîtâdibhâvo atîtânâgatapaccuppannabhâvo addhâvasena  idhâpi khandhavibhañge suttantabhâjanîyattâ niddhititabbo siyâti yojanâ* (*Anutî*.-2:12) 

The following gives the meaning of these *atthakathâ tîkâ*. 

Of these two *suttantapariyâya* and *abhidhammaniddesa* ways, *khandhâvibhañ*- *bhâjaniya* of this treatment is *suttantabhâjaniya* way.  As the nature of the past, future and present are exhorted by designating via an existence by power of *addhâ*, so should the nature of past, future and present be designated via an existence by power of *addhâ* only.  Although it should be so, the *suttantabhâjaniya dhamma*, like ***Baddekarattasut*- *tana*,** is a kind of ***Abhidhamma desanâ*** which appears by the power of analytical selection of individual objects of *paramattha vipassanâ ñâna*.  Therefore, it must be noted that the Buddha has exhorted on the past, future and present via *Abhidhamma*- *niddesa* way (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 7; *Anutî*.-2:12). 

[Note.  According to the explanation given by the above doctrines the five-fold *khandhâ*s of the past, future and present have been instructed to be designated via an existence by the power of *addhâ*.  It means that it the *suttantabhâjanîya* way.  But though it is the *suttantabhâjanîya* way, it is a kind of *abhidhamâ desanâ* which analyze the *dhamma*s that have been expatiated by way of analytical examination.  Because of this, it must be remembered that the Buddha has instructed the five-fold  *khandhâ*s  of  the past, future and present just by *abhidhamâ desanâ* way. 

**Another Explanation** 

*Aparo yano* – *idañhi rûpam addhâ-santati-samaya-khanavasena catudhâ atîtam nâma hoti*.  *Tathâ anâgatapaccuppannam*.  ***Addhâvasena** tâva ekassa ekassamañ bhave  patisandhito pubbe atîtam*,  *cutito uddham anâgatam*, *ubannamantare paccuppannam*. *Santativasena sabhâgaekautusamutthânam ekâhârasamutthânañca pubbâpariya-*

*vasena pavuttamânampi paccuppannam*, *tato pubbe visabhâgautuâhârasamutthânam atîtam*, *paccâ anâgatam*.  *Cittajam ekavîthi-ekajavana-ekasamâpattisamutthânam* 

*paccuppannam*, *tato pubbe atîtam*, *pacchâ anâgatam*.  *Kammasamutthânassa pâtiyak-*

*kam santativasena atîtâdibhedo natthi*, *tesaññeva pana utuâhâracittasamutthânam  upatthaambhakavasena tassa atîtâdibhedo (=atîtâdibhâvo) veditabbo*. ***Samayavasena** ekamuhuttapubbahnasâyanarattidivâdîsu samayesu santânavasena pavuttamânam tam tam samayam paccuppannam nâma*, *tato pubbe atîtam*, *pacchâ  anâgatam*. 

***Khanavasena** uppâdâdikhanattayapariyâpannam paccuppannam nâma*.  *Tato pubbe  atîtam pacchâ anâgatam*. 

*Apica atikkantahetupaccayakiccan atîtam*, *nitthitahetukiccam anitthitapaccayakiccam paccuppanam*, *ubhayakiccam asampattam anâgatam*.  *Sakiccakkhane vâ paccuppan-* 

*nam*, *tato pubbe atîtam*, *pacchâ anâgatam.* 

*Ettha ca khanâdikathâva nipariyâyâ*, *sesâ sapariyâyâ*. *Tâsu nipariyâyakathâ idha  adhippetâ* (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 7 – 8; V*isuddhi*-2: 103). 

What the above doctrines actually mean is as follows. –  

1. *Addhâ* = the period referred to as *Bhava*, 
1. *Santati* = the continuity, 
1. *Samaya* = time (period of time), 
1. *Khana* = moment which occurs as *upâda*-*tthî*-*bhañ*, all in four by virtue of which*       the past is designated. 

The future and present are designated in the same way. 

**The Period Denoted as *Addhâ* (= *Bhava*)** 

`  `Of the four *addhâ*-*santati*-*samaya*-*khana* categories, the ***addhâ***-*saddâ* is the time referred to as an existence designated by *cuti patisanddhe*. 

**“*Ahosim nu kho atîtamaddhâ nam*.”** (*Ma*.-1: 10; *Sam*.-1: 256). 

“Had I been formed at the time of the past existence.” 

`           `In this way it can be known, by power of *suttana desanâ* way, from  exhortation made in the Nidânavaggasamyutta, Ãhâravaga, Paccaya Suttana etc. that the *addhâ saddâ*  arises at a time of a certain existence delineated by *cuti patisandhe*. 

In another way – 

*Tayome  bhikkhave addhâ*, *katame tayo*?  *Atîto addhâ*, *anâgato addhâ*, *paccup- panno addhâ* (*Khu*.-1: 232; *Dî*.-3: 181). 

Bhikkhus …. The three periods are these.  They are the past, future and present. 

`           `In this Pâli, by virtue of Khandhavaggasamyutta, Upayavaga, Niruttipatha suttana, the meaning of *addhâ*-*saddâ* as given by designating moment of  *upâda*-*tthî*-*bhañ* =  arising-static-perishing away of *paramatta* is pertinent from view point of *paramat*.*t*.*h* *a*.  

It is so because in the ***Niruttapathasuttana*** is given as 

*Yam*. *bhikkhave rûpam*. *jâtam*. *pâtubhûtam*., “*atthî*”*ti tassa sañkhâ* (*Sam*. .-2: 60). 

Bhikkhus ….  That *rûpa* is still arising, clearly appearing.  Recognition of the  

.

actual existence of that *rûpa* by name arises (*Sam*.-2: 60). 

In the ***Niruttapatha** suttana* expatiation has been made of the distinctly arising *rûpa* *dhamma* in the state of *upâda*-*t*..*thî*-*bhañ* as the present *rûpa*, as past *rûpa* which has arisen long before the still existing present *rûpa*, and as the future *rûpa* going to arise  after the present. 

`         `Therefore, the following two kinds of period have been given in the *suttana* *desanâ*. 

1. An *addhâ* as a kind of period, referred to as an existence designated by the *cuti* *pantisandhe* (= a time of existence) 
1. An (*khana*) *addhâ* (= a period called *khana*) designated by the prevailing *khana*  

`      `called *upâda*-*t*..*thî*-*bhañ* = arising-static-perishing away of the *paramatta*s. 

Although these two *addhâ* are described in the *suttana desanâ*s, the Buddha has admonished in the  *suttana*  and  *pâli*  that the past, future and present existences are  designated by *cuti patisandhe*  and *bhava* referred to as *addhâ* period. 

Following the general exhortation the *atthakathâ sayâdaw* has explained the  
PAGE137

designation of the past, future and present in another way. 

1. ***Addhâ*** – at a certain time during the existence of a certain living being, all the *rûpa*s from the stage of *patisandhe* of the prevailing *bhava* to the past belong to the past *rûpa*s. The *rûpa*s spanning from the *cuti* of this *bhava* to those of the coming existence are all the future *rûpa*s.  The *rûpa*s midway between the the past and future are all the present ones. 
1. If stated by virtue of *santati* (continuity), it will be as follows. 

A certain *rûpa* which arises due to a certain relevant *utu* as the cause, and to a certain *ahâra* as a cause, might have done so by virtue of whether the long past or later, but is still the present *rûpa*.  (It indicates that *sabhâgaekautusamu*.*t*.*thânarûpa*, *sabhâga- ekaahârasamu*.*t*.*thânarûpa* is the *paccuppana rûpa*). 

The *sabhâgaekautusamutthâna*, the *visabhâgautusamutthânarûpa* prior to the *sa-* .. ..

*bhâgaekâhârasamut*.*t*.*hânarûpa* = irrelevant *utu* as the cause, *visabhâgaâhârasamut*.*t*.*hâna- rûpa* = irrelevant *âhâra* as the cause is the *rûpa* that belongs to the past. 

The *sabhâgaekautusamutthâna*, the *visabhâgautusamutthânarûpa* after the *sabhâ- gaekâhârasamut*.*t*.*h* *ânarûpa* = irrelevant *utu* as the cause, *visabhâgaâhârasamut*.*t*.*h* *âna- rûpa* = irrelevant *âhâra* as the cause is the *rûpa* that belongs to the future. 

***Sabhâutu – Âhâra   Ekautu – Âhâra*** 

*Sîtam*. *sîtassa sabhâg*.*o*, *tathâunham*. *vâ sîtam*. *unham*.. *unhassa*. .  *Yam*. *pana*. *sîtam*. *un*.*ham*. *v*.*â sarîre sannipatitam santânavasena pavattamânam anûnam anad*.*hikam* .*ekakâr*.*am*, *tam* 

*eko utûti vuccati*.  *Sabhâgautuno anekantasabhâvato ekagahanam katam*, *evum âhârepi*  (*Mûla*.*tî*.-2: 6). 

***Santâvasenâ**ti pubbâparavasena*. _Pubbenâparassa samappamânatâya **anu anadhikam**_**.**,_   

- .

*tato eva **ekâkâram***.  *Tena visabhâgautunâ anantarikatam dasseti* (*Anu*.*tî*.-2: 12).   

***Sabhâgautu*** — the cold *sîtautu* is the *sabhâgadhamma* being relevant to *sîtautu*. 

`  `In the same way, the hot *unhautu* is the *sabhâgautu* being relevant to *unhautu*. 

***Ekautu*** — A combination of cold *sîtautu*, and hot *unhautu* affecting the body  together, or if a certain *uhnautu* arises by virtue of association of the former and later 

*rûpa*s in a continuous process, a .c.e rtain phenomenon exists wh.i.c h is of its original nature, but no more nor less than it.  That *utu* is referred to as *ekautua* = a particular kind of *utu*.  

(The *utu* that is exerting its effect on the material body is a continuous process of that of the former and later *rûpa*s.  If that *utu* would be measured by a thermometer, it would neither be less nor more, but remains constant throughout, and such an *utu* is the *ekautu* = said to be an *utu*. For example, if a cold *sîtarûpa* process occurs continuously for an hour, then the continuity of the process of physical *utu* in that duration will neither be more nor less, but constant; and so would be the hot *uhnarûpa* process).  Such a natural *dhamma*, because it has the same nature, should be taken as a factor of single phenomenon.   This statement as *ekakâram* = singleness of phenomenon, vindicates the non-existance of  dissimilar nature of *sabhâgautu*. 

Within this *sabhâgautu*, however, the *utu*s (the physical changes), which are the *pramatthadhamma sabhâva*, are occurring in many ways.  The *utujarûpa*s are arising and  dissolving.  Within a *sabhâgautu* many *paramatthadhammasabhâva*s conspicuously are present, anf this situation might mislead one to take ***sabhâgautu*** as ***anekautu***.  To avoid this misconception, the *atthakat*.*t*.*h* *â sayâdaw* has expatiated as ***ekautusamut*.*t*.*h* *ânam*** by  inclusion of *eka*-*saddâ* to make one understand via process of continuity just a single *utu*. 

- . 
.. 
PAGE138

***E**sa**v**b**u**h**m**â g**â**e**h**k**â**â**r**h**e**â**p**r**i**atim* .*i* *t tnhâam vai*.*s* *a* “*bThaâtgoâ phuâbrbene av iasnaabnhtâagraituot uaânheâkaravsâarmamut athnâenkaamd*. *i vaatîstaamm*. *p*, *ip bahccuhttâo  anâgatan*”*ti hivuttanti*.  “*Ekâhârasamu*.*t*.*t* *hânan*”*ti pana vuttattâ ekasseva âhârassa yojanâ*  

*yuttarûpâti pare* (*Anu*.*t* *î*.-2: 12). 

In this *âhârasamutthâna rûpa* also Mûlatîkâsayâdaw has instructed the idea of *ekâhâra* to be taken in a si.m. ilar way to the above.  The food that is consumed many times  

and many days, and irrelevent to *visabhâgaâhâra*, is an *âhâra* of a certain kind.  

Therefore, in the *atthakathâ*, it has been explained that – “the *rûpa* resulting from the s*abhâgaekautusamu*.*t*.*t* *h*.*â*. *na rûpa* and *sabhâgaekâhârasamut*.*t*.*h* *âna rûpa* formed due to 

previous *vibâga*-*âhâra*, belongs to the past, and that formed later to the future.” 

But,  because  the  *atthakathâ*  has  indicated  as  ***ekâhârasamutthânam**  a  rûpa* resulting from a certain âhâ.r.a , the ***appare saya*s*** have instructed that t**.**h**.**e**  *rûpa* resulting 

from a single *âhâra* within a *rûpakalâpa* is the *ekâhârasamut*.*t*.*h* *âna rûpa* = only when  described comparatively as the *rûpa* resulting from a certain *âhâra*, it will be relevent. 

[The honorable *tîkâ sayâdaw*, named Ãcariyadhammapâla, has exhorted this ***vâda*** of  the  **honorable *apar***.***e***   ***sayâs***  in the  last  part  of  the  explanation, it  should noted  in 

essence that it was made so because they have the will for some one to note in that way.  In the present book too, when explanation was made of *rûpaghana* and *nâmaghana* in the section on *santatighana*, *rûpa*s are described as the results a certain *utu* and an *âhâra*.  The *utuja rûpa*s  which have come to result step by step because of *tejo dhatu* within a *rûpa kalâpa*, which is like *cakkhudasaka kalâpa*, are the *rûpa dhamma*s resulting from the a certain single *utu*.  So also, like the *cakkhudasaka kâpa*, the *âhârajarûpa*s, resulting step by step by support of the *ojâ* of the *ojâka âhârajarûpa*s, are the *rûpa dhamma*s resulting from a certain single *utu*.   In cultivating and *vipassanâ* exercising on these *rûpa dhamma*s as instructed this way until attainment of *khana paccuppana*, of acquiring eye of wisdom to arrive at *paramat*.*t*.*h* *a*, and only when the *paramat*.*t*.*h* *a* is so attained will the  light of anatta brilliantly shine.] 

This is how the *utujarûpa*s and the *âhârja rûpa*s of the past, future and present times are designated by the power of  *santati*.   The designation of the past, future and  present times of the *cittajarûpa*s by virtue of *santati* is as follows. 

***Santati* of *Cittasamutthâna*** 

The material phenomenon of consciousness p**..**r** oduced from mind are called 

1. *Rûpa* formed of a certain five door process, 
1. *Rûpa* formed of  a certain mind-door process, 
1. *Rûpa* formed of a certain *samâpatti* = *samâpattivîthi* as the cause, are all the 
\*
`      `*paccuppana rûpa*. 

The previous material phenomenon of mind formed of a certain five-door process,* that* formed of  a certain mind-door process, and  that formed of a certain *samâpatta* is the *rûpa* of the past.  The material phenomenon of mind that is produced later is the *rûpa* of the future. 

**.. *Santati* of *Kammasamutthaâna*** 

The *kamma*-produced *kammasamutthâna rûpa* by virtue of the *santati* process which are not defferentiated as of the pas..t , present and future respectively.  (What it 

means is that because the material phenomenon formed of *kamma* is produced by the previous  *kamma*  there is no variation in the  *santati*.).  With respect to this assertion, it  

PAGE142

should be noted that differentiation of the past, future and present by power of which 

1. *Utusamutthana rûpa* (= material phenomenon formed of physical change), 
1. *Ãhârasam*..*u* *t*.*t*.*h* *âna rûpa* (= material phenomenon formed of nutrition), 
1. *Cittasamu*.*t*.*t* *hâna rûpa* (= material phenomenon formed of consciousness) can be 

produced. 

After describing the past, future and present *rûpa*s which are produced by power of  *santati*, the  *at*.*t*.*h* *akathâ* has explained the differentiation of the past, future and present  *rûpa*s by power of *samaya*. 

**Designation of the Past-Future-Present *Rûpa*s by Power of *Samaya*** 

1. One *muhutta* (suddenly), 
1. Morning time, 
1. Evening time, 
1. Night time, 
1. Day time, etc. 

ptmhreeod cpTieathsassett oH ,  *r*ar e*û*salrl *p*npe b*a*d,e e  rtplefhoorxoonrpscmgleea  itsntnohsag eapt sit ro  *v*ewpn*i*s*p*rsieol*a* nld*s* htbu*s*.a e*a*c vT *n*efed*a*oh*   reb*k*dm e*ar*u*û*ee*m*rnd*p*i*a*n  *a*l*t*.ggas*t*. *h*  titfev*a*hore*n*e rnbms*a* ee eel ion*s*dx*a*n  ei*m*ogrnc l *a*tdiaos*y*e e s*a*rt ih  om=e*a*n i *t*. flp*t*.vau*h* eart.*a*r u.rwi*k* iroo*a*eadu*t*.y*h*s s  *â* pbfsary ec ivtvnoii orrstsuu usaepls ypso ooafc lrltti h abteoee fld*s* o*a* tnwh*n*go*t*i*a* tsth*t*oe*i*      *santati* and those associated with *samaya*.  In this context –  

1. *Samaya* = by power of *santati*, but not considering the time period –  
1. Not considering the *santati*, but by power of *samaya*, the *rûpa*s of the past, future        and present should be analytically differentiated (*Mûla*.*tî* .-2: 7; *Anut*.*î* .-2: 12). 

*Paccuppannarûpam*. *nâma jâtam*. *khanattayapariyâpannanti attho*.  *Tam*. *pana âdito  duppariggahanti santatipaccuppannavasena vipassanâbhiniveso*. *k*. *âtabbo* (*Mahâ*.*tî-2:419)* 

In accordance with the explanation of this *tîkâ*, *rûpa* which is appearing, complete 

with the three minor *khanas* such as *upâda*-.*t*.*t* *hî*-*bh*.*añ*, is referred to as *rûpa* of the present from point of view of *udayabbaya ñân*.*a*.  For a beginner, an *âdikammika* individual, 

recognizing this  *paccuppanna rûpa*  analytically is very difficult.   To begin with, there- 

fore, taking to heart via *vipassanâ* by virtue of *santatipaccuppanna* must be exercised. 

- . .

*Tassa yadâ ñânam tikkham visadam hutvâ pavattati*, *tadâ rûpadhammo khane khane  uppajjantâ*, *bhijjantâ ca hutvâ upat*.*t*.*h* *ahanti* (*Mahât*.*î*.-2: 422). 

In this way the mind of that meditator will become clear and active.  Then in his knowledge will appear the recognition of the arising and perishing away of the *rûpa*  *dhamma*s and and *nâma dhamma*s with every passing moment (*Mahâ*.*tî*.-2: 422). 

Therefore,  the  *santatipaccuppana*  and  *samayapaccuppana*  are  very  helpful  to attain the *khanapaccuppanna* of the *rûpa-nâmaparamatta* through the eye of wisdom.  For this reason the terms *santatikathâ* and *samayakathâ* have been explained by the older *a*.*t*.*t* *hakathâ sayadaws*.  In Pâli, however, direct mention has been made only of the two kinds: the *addhâ* and *khana*. 

**Division of the Past-Future-Present by Way of *Khana*** 

The *rûpa* that belongs to the three minor *khanas* as *upâda*-*t*.*t*.*h* *î*-*bhañ* is that of the present.  That which was formed prior to this *rûpa* is that of the past, and all the *rûpa*s 

.. 

that would be formed after the present belong to the future (*Abhi-ttha.-2*: 7 - 8; *Visuddhi*- 2: 113). 

**Explained in Another Way** 

The rûpa of previous *hetukicca* and *paccayakicca* belongs to the past.  The *rûpa* which is of accomplished *hetukicca*, but *paccayakicca* yet to accomplish, belongs to the  present.  When both *hetukicca* and *paccayakicca* are not yet accomplished, then the *rûpa*  belongs to the future. 

Or the *rûpa* still arising while at the moment of performing its *kicca* is that of the present.  That which is of the time perior to the present is of the past.  The  *rûpa*  that is  formed later belongs to the future. 

The *janaka* cause which can directly produce the *rûpa dhamma*s is the *hetu* cause.  The *upatthambhaka* cause which provides support is the *paccaya* cause. 

*Janaka*  (= *hetu*)  which as a cause directly produces the  *rûpa* is the *hetu* function. The provision of support by  *upatthambhaka*  as a cause  (*paccaya* cause) is the  *paccya*  function. 

For example production of a sprout is the function of a fertile seed.  Water-soil- *utu* (= *pathavîrasa*-*âporasa*-sunlight), which provide support in production of the sprout,  is the function of water, soil, utu etc.  (This is a example from mundane point of view). *nâma* is*K* t*a*h*t*.e*a*  *t*f*t*u*â*n*r*c*û*t*p*io*a*n o fo f*k* *a*th*m*i*m*s *kaa* =*m* t*m*h*a*e .f o Trmhea tsiuopnp oofr t*k* *a*p*m*ro*m*v*a*id-epdro bdyu ctehde  *râûhpâar* *a*a nedtc t.h ien  rtehseu lptaron-t 

duction of the *kamma*-produced *rûpa* and the resultant *nâma* is the function of this *âhâra*.  (This is an example from *sâsanâ* point of view). 

Similar to the above examples, a certain *rûpakalâpa* and a certain *cittuppâda*, referred to as mind and mental concomitant = *kamma* which is a *janaka* force that can directly produce *kamma*-produced *rûpa* and the resultant *nâma*. Thus providing support by means of *paccaya* forces such as the *nânâkkhanikakamma* force, *upanissaya* force and *âhâra* force.  In these resultant *rûpa*-*nâma dhamma*s too, the four-fold *nâmakhandhâ*s  and *paramatta dhamma*s are reciprocating each other by way of *paccaya* forces such as *sahajâta* etc..  The four great elements of *bhûtarûpa* are supporting each other, as the  *bhûtarûpa* is supporting the *upâdârûpa*, by way of *paccaya* forces such as *sahajâta* etc..  

In this way, the *rûpa* which is arising and*  at the moment of performing its own function such as *hetukicca* (= *janakakicca*), *upatthambhakakicca* (= *paccayakicca*), is  the present *rûpa*.  The *rûpa* prior to this belongs to the past and that about to be formed to  the future.   (*Mula*.*t* *î*.-2: 7; *Anu*.*t* *î*.-2: 12 – 13). 

**Certainty and *Pariyâya*** 

*It*.*t*.*h* *a ca khanâdikathâva nippariyâyâ*, *sesâ pariyâyâ* (*Abhi*.-*T*..*t* *ha.-*2: 8; *Visuddhi*-2: 203).            In designation of the past, future and present, the terms *khanakathâ* and *kiccakathâ* are not *pariyâya* but are the terms of certainty.  The remaining terms such as –  

1. *Addhâkathâ* = a term related to time period of a *bhava*, 
1. *Santatikathâ* = a term related to continuity, 
1. *Samayakathâ* =   a term related to time – are the terms accompanied by *pariyâya*.  

Among various terms, the certainty but not the  *pariyâya*,  is what is required in this  Vibhañpâli (*Abhi*.-*T*..*t* *ha*.-2: 8). 

**The Designation of the Past-Future-Present in *Nâma*** 

*Atîtâdivibhâge panattha santativasena khanâdivasena ca vedanâya atîtânâgata- paccupppannabhâvo veditabbo*.  *Tattha **santativasena** ekavîthiekajavanaekasammapatti*-

.. 

*pariyâpannâ ekavîthivisayasamâyogappavattâ ca paccuppannâ*, *tato pubbe atîtâ*, *pacchâ anâgatâ*.  ***Khanâdivasena** khanattaya pariyâpannâ pubbantâparantamajjattagatâ sakiccañca kurumâna vedanâ paccuppannâ*, *tato pubbe atîtâ*, *pacchâ anâgatâ* (*Visuddhi*- 2: 104; *Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 8). 

`           `Here, in discrimitating the past, future and present *santati* = by virtue of continuity and of *khana*-*kicca*, the state of being the past, future and present of the *vedanâ* (the four- fold *khandhâs*). 

Then it could be stated from point of view of *santati* as follows. 

1. *Vedanâ* related to one of five-door processes, 
1. *Vedanâ* related to one of mind-door processes, 
1. *Vedanâ* related to a certain *samâpatti*, 
1. The unique feature of the Buddha as the only object of corporeality, the sound of recitation of *desanâ* as the only object of sense of hearing etc., the object received by the five-fold door processes, and the *vedanâ* that are included in *tadanuvattika*, mind-door processes etc. which  still take them as the object, are the *paccuppanna vedanâ*s.  Those that were prior to these belong to the past, and those to be formed  

`      `later belong to the future. 

If stated in relation to *khana*-*kicca*, it will be as follows.  

`      `The *vedanâ*s associated with the three *khana*s, such as *upâ*.*d*. *a*-*tthî*-*bhañ*, are all *paccuppanna vedanâs*.  The *vedanâ*s produced prior to those associated with these 

three *khana*s are of the past, and those arising after those associated with these three 

` `*khana*s are of the future. 

The *vedanâ*s produced between the front end, the *upâda*, and the hind end, the *bhañ*, i.e., *vedanâ*s associated with the three *khana*s, and located midway between that prior to or after it, which are still in arising state and performing its own functions, are the *paccuppanna vedanâ*s.  The *vedanâ*s which have arisen before these are of the past and  those that are going to arise aftward are of the future (*Abhi*.-*T*..*t* *ha*.-2: 13; *Visuddhi*-2: 104) 

Note that it is the same in the remaining three *nâmakhandhâ*s as in the case of the *vedanakkhandhâ*s.  This how the the past, future and present are appreciated in the five- fold *khandhâ*s.  **.** 

***Bhûtam Bhûtato Passati*** 

*Bhûtam bhûtato passati* = seeing things as they really are.  With reference to this *desanâ*, some have conceived that *vipassanâ* exercise should be  made with emphasis only on the   *paccuppanna*.   Now the explanation will be made as to what this  *desanâ*  really means. 

*Katth*. *añca bhikkhave cakkhumanto  passanti?  Idha bhikkhu bhûtam*.  *bhûtato passa*. *ti*, *b**B**h**h**û**û**ta**t**m**a**n btih kûhtaatnod bdhhiasipvkaâkñh bcahavûketa acmsa*.*s* .*k* *ak* *T hnauimbm*.*b*  *ahidni âtpo*.*y* *a apc acvsairsyâasgtaiâ* *m*(*yKbahh nûuit*.*r*-*ao*1*tdt*:*â* *h*2 *âp*2*ya*4*ar*;  *aIpmtaivatiutptthataankntaoo*)  *v* *hijojtaim*.  *âEnvautmtâ  kchao*   

*bhûtanti vuccati*.  *Tehnâa* “*bhûtamidam bhikkhave samnupassathâ”ti*.  ***Bhûtato** aviparî- tasabhâvato sal*.*a* *kkhanato samaññalakkhanato ca passati*.  *Id*. *am*.  *hi khandhapañcakam*.*  

*nâmarû*.*p* *amattam*.  *Ta*. *ttha “ime pathavîâdayo d*. *hammâ rûpam*, *ime phassâd*.*a* *yo dhammâ* 

*nâmam*, *imâni nesam lakkhanâdîni*, *ime nesam avijjâdayo paccayâ”ti evum sapaccaya-*

. 

- .  .  . . 
  - .  **.** 
PAGE143

*nâmarûpassanavasena ceva*, “*sabbepime dhammâ ahutvâ samobhanti*, *hutvâ pativanti*, *tasmâ* *aniccâ*, *aniccattâ dukkhâ*, *dukkhattâ anattâ*”*ti evum aniccânupassanâdivasena ca* 

*passatîti attho*.  *Etavatâ tarunavipassanâpariyosânâ vipassanâbhûmi dassitâ*.  ***Nibbidâyâ**ti bhûtasañkhâtassa tebhûmakadhammajâtassa nibbindanattâya*, *etena balava- vipassanam dasseti*.  ***Virâgâyâ**ti virâgattam virajjanattham*, *iminâ maggam dasseti*.  ***Nirodhâyâ**ti nirujjhanattham*, *iminâpi maggameva dasseti*.  ***Nirodhâyâ**ti vâ patippassd- dhinirodhena saddhim anupâdisesanibbânam dasseti*.  ***Evum kho bhikkhave cakkhu- manto passantî**ti evum paññâcakkhumanto sapubbâgena maggapaññâcakkhunâ  catusaccadhammam passanti* (*Itivuttakatthakathâ*: 170 – 171). 

***Bhuta**nti khandhapañcakam*. .  *Tahñi yathâsakam*.  *paccayeti jâtattâ*, *paramatthato vijjamâ-tattâ ca bhûmanti vuccati*.  ***Bhutato**ti yathâbhûtasabhâvato salakkhanato*,  *ca sâmañña-lakkhanato ca* (*Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2: 364).* 

Bhikkhus …. How do those who could rightly understand = those endowed with eye of wisdom, called  *yathâbhûtañân*. *adassana*,  could visualize the phenomena in their 

` `true nature? 

Bhikkhus ….  In this *sâsanâ*, a  meditating monk could visualize the five-fold *khandhâ*s in their true nature, each resulting from its own respective cause, and each  distinct by way of *paramattha* = via respective specific character, via general character referred to as the properties of impermanance,  of suffering and of unreality, which are concerned with all elements of *paramattha*, the five-fold *khandhâ*s are visualized by eye of wisdom (called *vipassanâdi*.*t*.*thi* and *maggasammâdit*.*t*.*hi*).  He practices for the purpose of freeing himself from, attachment and clinging to the five-fold *khandhâ*s with specific and general characters by discerning on their true nature.  Bhikkhus …. Those  who are endowed with the eye of wisdom, called *yathâbhûtañân*. *adassana*, never falter but see things in their true nature (*Khu*.-1: 224; *Itivuttaka-Di*.*t*.*thigata* Suttan). 

All these five-fold *khandhâ*s are just the *nâma-rûpa*.  In these five, “the *dhamma*s, such as the *pathvî* etc., are *rûpa*; the *dhamma*s, like *phassa* etc., are *nâma*.  These are the *lakkhana*-*rasa*-*paccupatthâna*-*padatthâna* (property, taste, manifestation, and proximate cause)* of the *rûpa-nâma*.  These are the *dhamma*s of  *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sañkhâra*, *kamma* etc., of the *rûpa-nâma*.  By visualizing the *rûpa-nâma* and their causes in this way. And 

`          `“These *rûpa-nâmadhamma* and *sañkhâra dhamma*s all just made their appearances all  of  a  sudden  now,  and  are  non-existant  before;  persish  away  suddenly  and  are, therefore impermanence.  Because of being impermanent, they are sufferings, and so they 

are unrealities.”   In this way, by virtue of *aniccânupassanâ* etc., the visualization of th**.**e**  *rûpa-nâma*  and  their  causes  are  acquired.   This  is  what  really  is  meant  by  ***bhûtam bhûtato passati* =** seeing things as they truly are.  This much description would suffice to indicate the location of ***vipassanâbhûmi*** = plane of the insight knowledge which culmi- nates in the ***tarunavipassanâ*** (*Itivuttakatthakathâ*: 170 – 171). 

**[N.B.  *Tarunavipassanâ***  = *vipassanâ* in early stage is the name of four *ñâna*s: *sañkhârapricchedañâna*  (*ñâmarûpaparicchedañâna*),  *kañkhâvikaranañâna*  (.*paccaya- pariggahañâna*), *sammasanañâna, maggâmaggañâna* (= *udayabbayañâna*). *Sam.-T*..*t* *ha.*- 2: 50.] 

***Nibbidâya*** = to be tedius with worldly life means to become weary of worldly affairs such as the *dhamma*s of the three stages of being within the the three planes of life  By this *nibbidâya*, a forceful *vipassanâ* referred to as ***balavavipassanâ*** is indicated by the  
.. 
PAGE144

stanza (*Itivuttakatthakathâ*: 171). 

[N.B.   ***Balavavipassanâ*** is the name of four *ñâna*s such as *bhayatûpat*.*thânañâna*, *âdînavânupassanâñâna, muncitukamayatâñâna and sañkhârupakkhâñâna*. *Sam.-T*..*t* *ha.*- 2: 50.] 

***Virâgâya*** = A prctice leading to detachment from desire and craving.  The *Ariya*- *magga* is indicated by the *virâga*.  ***Nirodhâya*** = A practice leading to cessation of  *râga* like desire and craving.  By this *nirodhâya* too *Ariyamagga* is indicated.  Put in another way, it is indicated that ***nirodhâya*** also can the extinguish fire of *kilesâ*, and is assisted to completely extinguish by *ariyamaggaphala* named  *patipassaddhinirodha* and  *khandha*- *parinibbana* named *anupâdisesanibbâna* (*Itivuttakatthaka.-Tthâ*: 171). 

***Evum kho bhikkhave cakkhumanto passanti*** = Bhikkhu … The assertion that the noble ones who are endowed with the eye of wisdom, called *yathâbhûtañânadassana*, never falter but see things in their true nature means those who are so endowed could visualize  the  four  truth,  called  the  *dhamma*  of  the  four  noble  truth,  by  means  of *vipassanâcakkhu* together with *maggapaññâcakkhu* referred to as *pubbhâgasatipat-* *thânamagga* which occurs prior to *maggaariyamagga* (*Itivuttakatthaka.-T*..*t* *hâ*: 171). 

In accordance with this opening of the *atthalathâ* – ***bhûtam bhûtato passati*** = **realizing things as they truly are** – note that it visualizing the four truth, called the *dhamma* of the four noble truth, by means of *vipassanâpaññâcakkhu* and *ariymagga- paññâcakkhu*.  In explaining this way, the *atthakathâ sayâdaw* has referred to excerpts –   *bhûtamidam bhikkhave samanupassattha* etc. –  from *Mûlapannâsapâli* ***Mahâtahnâsañ-*** ***khaya suttana***   Therefore, these will be described here. 

**Extracts from *Mahâtahnâsañkhayasuttanna*** 

*Bhûtamidanti bhikkhave passathâti*.  *Evum*.  *bhante*.  *Tadâhârasambhavunti bhikkhave passathâti*.  *Evum bhante*.  *Tadâhâranirodhâ*.  *yam bhûtam*. , *tam*.  *nirodhadhammanti*  

*bhikkhave passathâti*.  *Evum bhante* (*Ma.-*1: 326). 

***Bhûtamidan**ti idam*.  *khandhañcakam*.  *jâtam*.  *bhûtam*.  *nibba*.*t* *tam*. , *tuhmepi bhûtamidanti bhikkha*.*v* *e passathâti*.  ***Tadâh***. ***ârasambhav**unti tam*.  *paneta*.*m*  *khandhañcakam*.  *âhârasam-*

*bhavum paccayasambhavum*, *sati paccaye uppajjati evum passathâti pucchati*.  ***Tadhâ- hâranirodhâ**ti tassa paccayassa nirodhâ* (*Ma.-T*..*t* *ha.-*2: 207).*   

*Hetupaccayehi jâtam*.  *nibbattam*.  *“bhûta”nti idhâdhippetam*. , *tam*.  *atthato pañcakkhandhâ tabbinimutt*.*a* *ssa* .*s* *appaccayassa abhâvato*, *yañca khandhapañ***.** *cakam*.  *attano tesañca* 

*bhikkhunam*, *ta*. *m “bhûtamida*”*nti bhagavâ avocâti âha “**idam khadhapañcaka”**nti*.  *Attano phalam âharatîti âhâro*, *paccay***.***o*** .  *Sambhavati etasamâti sambhavo*, *âhâro sambhavo etassâti **aâhârasambhavum***.  *Tenâha “**paccayasambhava**”nti*.  *Tassa* 

` `*paccayassa anuppâdanirodhâ*.  *Khananirodhâ pana kârananirapakkho* (*Ma.-T*. *î.-* 2:225). Bhikkhus …. Do you realize as these five-fold *khandhâ*s distinctly appear? 

Our Lord …. We do. 

`            `Bhikkhus …. Do you visualize as these five-fold *Khandhâ*s make their apperance  because of the presence of causes such as  *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sañkhâra* and *kamma*? 

Our Lord …. We do. 

Bhikkhus …. Do you realize that the five-fold *khandhâ*s cease, at the time of *parinibbâna*, by means of non-reappearable cessation, called the nature of *anuppâda- nirodha*, because of the dissolution of the causes like  *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sañkhâra* and *kamma* by means of non-reappearable cessation, called  *anuppâdanirodha*,  by virtue  

PAGE149

of *arahattamagga*. 

Our Lord …. We do. (*Ma.-*1: 326). 

In this *suttana* the Buddha, in continuation, has expatiated *anulomapaccayakâra*, referred to as the process of formation of *sansarâ* called the *anulomapaticca samuppâda desanâ*,  and the  *patilomapaccayakâra*,  referred to as the process of dissolution of the  *sansarâ* called *patilomapaticca samuppâda desanâ*. 

In concord with these  *desanâ*s – *bhûtam*.  *bhûtato passati –* realizing things as they  really are is exaplined as follows. 

1. The  truth  of  suffering  of  the  five-fold  *khandhâ*s  with  past,  future,  present, internal,  external,  gross,  delicate,  inferior,  superior,  remote,  near  etc.  as  11 characters  which the *âsava* *dhamma* take as object and at which attachment by *tahnâ-ditthi* is made as I-Mine, are realized by insight knowledge referred to as *attapaccakhañâna*.  And are also realized by *asammohapativedha* (discriminative insight of the object) and *ariyamaggapaññâ* which can visualize penetratively.  
1. The *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdâna, sañkhâra* and *kamma* named the truth of arising of the sufferings of the past cultivated when the previous existance was established,   
1. the distinct formation as the resultant these causes of the present five-fold rebirth *khandhâ*s as the truth of arising of the sufferings, and because of these causes the future  five-fold  rebirth *khandhâ*s  as  the  truth  of arising  of the  sufferings, are realized  by  insight  knowledge  known  as  *attapaccakkhañâna*.   And  are  also realized  by  *asammohapativedha*  and  *ariyamaggapaññâ*  which  can  visualize penetratively.  (It is the *paccayto udayadassana*.  See *Visuddhi*-2: 267). 
1. When vipassanâ exercise is made on the truth of arising of the sufferings as the causative factor and the truth of sufferings as the resultant, the meditator sees the arising and perishing away of the truth of sufferings, the truth of arising of the sufferings, the nature of imperamnence, suffering and non-self of these *sañkhâra dhamma*s, by insight knowledge called *attapaccakkhañâna*.They are also realized by *asammohapativedha* and *ariyamaggapaññâ* which can visualize penetratively. (It is vision of truth of sufferrings due to penetrative knolwedge of *jâtidukkha* and *maranadukkha*.  *Visuddhi*-2: 267). 
1. When the causes, the truth of the origin of sufferings, get extinguished because of *arahattamagga* by way of non-reappearable cessation called *anuppâdanirodha*, the resultant *upâdânakkhandhâ*s enter *khandhaparinibbana* and get dissolved by way  of  non-reappaearable  cessation.   This  is  realized  by  insight  knowledge referred to as *attapaccakkhanñâna*.  It is also realized by the penetrative sight of *ariyamaggapaññâ* by virtue of nature *asammohapativedha*.  (It is the *paccayato vayadassanañâna*.  *Visuddhi*-2: 267).   
1. When one is able to exercise *vipassanâ* on the *vipassanâñâna* which can concen- trate,  referred  to  as  *pativipassanâ*,  then  *sammâditthi*  (=  insight  knowledge), *sammâsañkappa* (= *vitakka*), *sammâsati*, *sammâsamâdhi* (= *ekaggatâ*) which are the  *lokîmaggasaccâ  dhamma*s  initiated  by  *vipassanâñâna*  associated  in  the absorption of the *vipassanâ* discerning at that moment, are also realized by insight knowledge referred to as *attapaccakkhanñâna*.   It is also realized by the pene- trative sight of *ariyamaggapaññâ* by virtue of nature *asammohapativedha*.   (It is nominated as *maggasaccâ* because these *lokîmaggañ* *dhamma*s can detach, for a moment, the delusion which hinders the understanding of nature of arising and passing away of *sañkhâra* phenomena.  It is the *lokîmaggasaccâ*. *Visuddhi-*2: 267 -268).  
6. At the end of insight knowledge and when *ariyamaggañâna* appears distinctly, the noble *dhamma* called the truth of cessation of suffering referred to as the *asañkhatadhâtu*  and  the  element  of  peacefulness,  the  *nibbâna*,  will  also  be visualized.  (It is the *lokuttara nirodhasaccâ*, and the *arammanapativedha*). 
6. The noble eightfold path associated with *ariyamagga* is the *maggasaccâ*.  
\*
`     `The  *ariyamagga*  also  can  discern  the  *maggasaccâ  dhamma*  by  way  of   *asammohapativedha*.  (It is the *lokuttarâ maggasaccâdhamma*.  It is the *asammo-* 

`     `*hapativedha*). 

`     `In  this  way,  those  who  are  possessed  of  the  insight  knowledge*  referred  to  as 

*attapaccakkhañâna* and eye of wisdom, called *ariyamaggapaññâ*, can see the four- fold truth *dhamma* (*catusaccadhamma*) of the *lokî* and *lokuttarâ* by the eye of insight knowledge before, and by the eye of *ariyamaggapaññâ*, .d uring the *ariyamaggakhana*.  The realization in this way has been designated as – *bhûtam bhûtato passati* – seeing  things as they realy are. 

In accordance with these explanations, from aspect of *bhûta* – the causes of the present *upâdânakkhandha,* when the *kamma bhava* was  being cultivated, initiated by *avijjâ*,  *tahnâ*,  *upâdâna*,  the  *kilesavatta*  and  *upâdânakkhandhâ,*  the  *kammavatta*  and *upâdânakkhandhâ* called the *sañkhâra* and *kamma,*  and root of these *kilesâ vatta* called the  *vipâkavatta*  and  *upâdânakkhandhâ*s  of the previous  *bhava*  are also included.   The present  *vipâkavatta  upâdânakkhandhâ*  resultants,  due to these past causes, are also  included here. 

Therefore,  the  cause  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  and  the  resultant  *upâdânakkhandhâ*, within the three periods of the past, future and present, are discerned until their specific characters are attained.  The realization of the specific characters, together with *rasa*, *paccuppatthâna* and *padatthâna*, of each of *paramatthadhâtu* associated with  these five- fold  *khandhâ*s by means of  *vipassanâpaññâcakkhu*  and  *ariyamaggapaññâcakkhu*  can 

` `also  be taken to see things as they really are. 

Again,  realization,  by  *vipassanâpaññâcakkhu*  and  *ariyamaggapaññâcakkhu*,  of distinct  arising of  the  resultant *upâdânakkhandhâ*  because  of  the  existence of  causes *upâdânakkhandhâ* referred to as *kilesâvatta*, *kammavatta*, and because of the dissolution of  the  causes  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  by  the  nature  of  *anuppâda-nirodha*  due  to *arahattamagga*, the resultants  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  cease when they enter  *parinibbâna* by  means of *anuppâdanirodha*, can also be taken to see things as they really are. 

Again, the understanding the impermanent, the suffering and non-self phenomena of  the  cause  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  and  the  resultant  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  by  virtue  of  the *vipassanâpaññâcakkhu* and *ariyamaggapaññâcakkhu* is also seeing things as they really are. 

`           `The realization of *vipassanâmanodvârikajovîthi* groups of mental processes, called the *vipassanâñâna* which can concentrate, and their *anicca*, *dukkha* and *anatta* pheno- mena, by way of *vipassanâpaññâcakkhu* and *ariyamaggapaññâcakkhu* is also seeing the  things as they really are. 

Once again realization of *Nibbâna dhamma*, which is the *lokuttarâ nirodhasaccâ*, by way of *ârammanapativedha* and *ariyamaggapaññâcakkhu* is called seeing things as  they really are. 

. 

Therefore, the *desanâ* – *bhûtam bhûtato passati* = seeing things as they really are, is not one that instruct to meditate on just the present, ignoring the attainment of the cause *upâdânakkhandha* and resultant *upâdânakkhandhâ* in any convenient way without treating *paññatti* and *paramatta* separately nor distinguishing the two.  It must be noted that this *desanâ* instructs to concentrate, on the cause *upâdânakkhandha* and resultant *upâdânakkhandhâ* to arrive at their specific and general characters and until the truth of the sessation of sufferings the *nibbâna* is attained, by the *vipassanâpaññâcakkhu* and *ariyamaggapaññâcakkhu*. 

**The Pillars of *Sâsanâ*** 

Suppose you, as a meditator, wish to see, arrive at, know, penetrate by knowledge of yours, and oriented toward the *mahâasañkhatadhâtu nibbâna dhamma*, which is the abode of Bhuddhas and the Noble Ones.  Then, to acquire it you must practice the Noble Eight Path exercise, without deviation in the direction, which is forceful enough to attain *nibbâna* straight away.  While you are on the right path there are (Four Vinaya) Four Rules of Bhuddhist Order that you must abide by to keep you from straying away from  the right direction.  The four rules are: 

1. *Sutta*, 
1. *Suttanuloma*, 
1. *Ãcariyavâda* and 
1. Attanomati.** 

**1.  *Sutta*** 

***Suttam***.**  *nâma tisso sangîtiyo âruhlâni tîni pitakâni*.  (*Dî.-Ttha.-*2: 158). 

***Sutta* –** The first *pancasatikasangâyanâ* was.  held by (500..)  *rahantâ* supervised by the Reverend Ashinmahâkassapa,  the second  Council *sattasatikasangâyanâ* by (700) 

*rahantâ* supervised by the Reverend Ashinmahâyasa and the third *sahassikasangâyanâ* by (1000) *rahantâ*  headed by the Reverend Ashinmahâmoggaliputtatissa, and the  Sutta- Vinaya-Abhidhammâ, together called The Triad of *Pit*.*a* *ka* presented and passed by these  three *sangâyanâ* are the **Sutta**.  Why it was so named is as follows. 

In the triad of pitaka, including *suttan pitaka*, the Buddha has set forth various kinds of practice and working processes for acq.u iring one’s own and others’ triad of 

benefit  as  man-god-*nibbâna*,  the  everlasting  peace.   For  those  god,  man,  *byahmâ,* *veneyya* and sentient beings who are to be relieved of the worldly affairs, exhortions have been made in different ways relevent to their *icchâsayadhâtu*, their habit and conditions.  Because the triad of *pit*.*a* *ka* can expose the sentient beings to various sorts of benefit, it  has been named ***sutta***. 

As paddy plant would bear fruits, so would triad of  *pitaka*, bless peace on human, god,  *byahm*. *â*  and  peace of  *nibbâna*,  and  because  the  triad  yields  various  kinds  of  peace, it is name ***sutta***. 

As a cow would let the milk down, so would the Buddha’s instructions, called the triad of  *pitaka*, bless different kinds of benefit as peace on human, god,  *byahmâ*  and  peace of  *nibbâna*, and because of this, it is named ***sutta***. 

Because the Buddha’s speeches, referred to as the triad of *pitaka* will look after the well-being of the human, byahmâ and nibbâna, and care of the various kinds of good practice for acquiring these benefits, it is again named ***sutta***. 

A measuring tape, used by a carpenter in  choosing the right measure of a piece of wood, and sawing up a measured dimension, is the *sutta*.  A line marking the measured dimension is the amount needed, because if the wood is sawed up long the measured line, it would give the dimension required.  Similarly the triad of *pitaka* direct – this is the way  to *nibbâna* – one to *nibbâna*.  And since these *desanâ*s are directing one to *nibbâna* as the measured line of demarkation enables the carpenter to cut the right dimension, it is called ***sutta***.  If a controversy ever arises with regard to the right or wrong way to the *nibbâna*, then it is the triad of *pitaka*, named *sutta*, on which the wise would relie to decide which  is the right way and which is not. 

As wind cannot disperse the flowers held by a thread in garlend,  so will the benefits such as the peacefulness of human, *byahmâ* and *nibbâna*, held together by the force of practice and working processes provided by the triad.  Because of this property,  the triad of *pitaka* is nominated as ***sutta*** (*Dî.-Ttha.*-1: 18). 

**Those Who Are Rejecting the Buddha** 

*Tattha suttam*.  *appatibâhiyam*. *, tam*.  *patibâhantena buddhova patibâhito hoti* (*Dî.-Ttha.*-2:  

158).  .. 

The meaning of this *atthakathâ* is this. If someone presented a statement  of the four *vinaya*, *sutta* etc. inclusive, and if it is the *sutta* called the triad of *pi*.*t* *aka*, which has been presented to and passed by the three *sangâyanâ*s, then it should not be rejected.  If the  statement  =  the  *pi*.*t* *aka*  is  rejcted  or  ignored,  the  it  is  no  other  than  rejecting  or ignoring  the  *sammâsambuddha*  (the  perfectly  enlightened  ones).   This  is  what  the  *atthakathâ* really means. 

m..e aningT hoifs   stMataehmâepnatr iinni btbhâen *a*a.*t*s.*t*u *h*t*a*ta*k*n*a*a*th*, *â*i s*s* *u*fo*tt*r*a* *m*a *a*m*hâ*e*v*d*â*it,a* toopre, nwinhgo  aiss  tghoe inexgp alalonnatgi otnh eo fp aththe   leading to *nibbâna*, to follow and be kept firmly in mind.   A meditator is reminded that, 

when searching for the right path to *nibbâna*, and when following this road, the Buddha is the best guide referred to as *maggakkhâyî* (one who tells the right way) and must not be ignored. 

**What Utterings of *Sammâambuddha*s Are** 

*Yañca bhikkhave rattimtathâgato anuttaram*.  *sammâsambhod*.*h* *im*.  *abhisambucchati*, *yañca rattim*.  *anuppâdisesâya nibb*. *ânadhâtuyâ parinibbâyati*, *yam etassamim*.*  *antare bhâsati* 

*lapati niddisati*, *sabbam tam tatheva hoti no aññathâ*.  *Tassamâ “tathâgato”ti vuccati.*  (*Am.-*1: 332 – *Lokasuttan*). 

Bikkhus I, as one who has found the truth and your teacher, can penetratively discern the knowledge of the perfectly enlightened, called the uncompared highest stage of the path knowledge and knowledge of omniscience, in the night. In the night I entered the stage of *parinibbâna* by way of *anupâdisesanibbânadhâtu* called dissolution of the five-fold *khandhâ*s in a non-reappearable cessation.  During the span of those two nights,  I speak, expatiate and instruct the *dhamma*.  These complete *dhamma* speeches are true as they are spoken, extorted and advised.  There never is the other any thing that is untrue in itself.   Therefore, you all should recognize me as  your  teacher the  ***tathâgata***  

(*Am.-*1: 332). 

With reference to the above *Pâli*, starting from the night of attainment of perfectly enlightened stage until the night *parinibbâna* (demise), a duration of (45) years of his life, all the *dhamma* speech that the Buddha has given are nothing but the truth.  There is none  

that is other than the truth.  Suppose a meditator would like to reject these true speeches.  Then he should have, in his *santâna,* a knowledge comparable to or superior to the analy- tically  preached  *dhamma*  and  the  completely  self-enlightened  knowledge  acquired through practice of the (30) species of the 10-fold perfection for four *sankkheyya* and a  lakh of universes.  Only then he can establish a *sâsanâ* parallel to the knowledge of  omniscience. 

The Buddha himself, however, has already exhorted to the famous upaka that there is there is no  such as thing as knowledge comparable to superior to the knowledge 

` `of omniscience. 

*Na me âcariyo atthi*, *sadiso me na vijjati*. 

*Sadevakassamim lokassamim*, *natthi me patipuggalo*. 

*Aham hi arahâ loke,, aham satthâ anussaro*. 

*Ekohm sammâsambhuddho*, *sîtibhûtosami nibbuto* (*Ma*.-1: 227). 

Upaka  ….  There  is  no  one  who  as  a  teacher  has  adviced  me  to  acquire  the knowledge of omniscience, I am uncompared.  There is no one among the *deva*s nor in  the whole *loka* who can compete with me. 

In this *loka* the I am the *Rahantâ*, non-imitable, leader of the *deva*s and humans.  I am the only God who rightly self-understands the whole *dhamma*.  I am peaceful as all  moral defilements have been extinguished (*Ma*.-1: 227). 

Read following again. 

*Advacchavacanâ buddha*, *amoghavacanâ jinâ*. 

*Vitatham natthi buddhânam*, *dhuvum buddho bhavâmaham*. 

*Yathâ khittam nabhe littu*, *dhuvum patati bhûmiyam*. 

*Tatheva buddhasitthânam*, *vacanam dhuvasassatam*. 

*Yathâpi sabbasattânam, maranam dhuvasassatam.* 

*Tatheva buddhasitthânam, vacanam dhuvasassatam.* 

*Yathâ rattikkhaye patte, sûriyuggamanam dhuvum.* 

*Tatheva buddhasitthânam, vacanam dhuvasassatam.* 

*Yathâ nikkhantasayanassa*, *sîhassa nadam dhuvum.* 

*Tatheva buddhasitthânam, vacanam dhuvasassatam.* 

*Yathâ âpannasattânam, bhâramâropanam dhuvum.* 

*Tatheva buddhasitthânam, vacanam dhuvasassatam*  

(*Buddhavumsa*- 306, etc.) 

The  *buddha*s are  not used  to  speak  double  entente.   The *buddha*s,  who  have destroyed the  five-fold evil,  do not speak nonsensical words.   Their speeches are never  erroneous.   Therefore, I should definitely be the Buddha. 

As  stone  thrown  upwards  will  definitely  come  down,  so  are  the  speeches  of *buddha*s are always right. 

The words of the *buddha*s are always true as the universal truth that all living  things must succumb to death. 

It is true that the sun always rises when the night comes to its end, similarly true always are the speeches of the *buddha*s.  It is true that a lion will always roar as he comes  out of his den after sleep, and so it is also true that the *buddha*s always speak truth. 

It is true that a pregnant woman would give birth to her child after carrying it full  term, and in the same way it is true that the *buddha*s’ speeches are always true. 
PAGE150

`       `These are the words of the Buddha that come in the section on Niyatabyâdita of the hermit Sumedhâ.  

**3.  *Suttânuloma*** 

***Suttânulomam***.  *nâma nulomakappiyam*.*  (*Dî.-Ttha.-*2:*  158). 

***Suttanuloma*** is the four-fold *vinaya mahâpadesa* i.n.  the *Vinayadesanâ* and the four-fold *suttanamahâpadesa* in the *Suttanadesanâ*.  The four-fold *vinayamahâpadesa* is 

given in *Vinayamahâvâpâli Bhesajjkkhandhaka* (348 – 349).  The four-fold *suttana- mahâpadesa* is given in *Suttamahâvâ Mahâparinibbânasuttana* (*Dî*.-2: 202 – 204). 

**The Four-Fold V*inayamahâpadesadhamma***  

1. Bhikkhus …. I should not advice you to reject a certain thing as “this thing is not suitable”.  It should be investigated with reference to *vinayadesanâ*, and if it is more towards the irrelevance than the relevance, then my sons, it is not suitable for you. 
1. Bhikkhus …. I should not advice you to reject a certain thing as “this thing is not suitable”.  It should be investigated with reference to *vinayadesanâ*, and if it is more towards the relevance than the irrelevance, then my sons, it is suitable for you. 
1. Bhikkhus …. I should not permit you to accept a certain thing as “it is suitable.”  That which is not permissible, when investigated  referring to the *vianayadesanâ*, and if it is more towards the irrelevance than the relevance, then my sons, it is not suitable for you. 
1. Bhikkhus …. I should not permit you to accept a certain thing as “it is suitable.” That which is not permissible, when investigated  referring to the *vianayadesanâ*, and if it is more towards the relevance than the irrelevance, then my sons, it is   

`      `suitable for you (*Vi.-*3: 348 – 349). 

`           `These are the four main rules named as *mahâpadesa* exhorted in the *vinayadesanâ*.  “This is the affair suitable for the monks, and this not.”  If an affair is to be decided whther it is suitable or not, then the decision has to be made in consultation with the four- fold *vinaya* rules, called *vinayamahâpadesa* given in the above *vinayadesanâ*.  When compared with the four-fold *vinaya* rules, any affair in favor of the suitability should be decided as “this affair is suitable.”   If not in favor, then ti should be decided as  “this an  unsuitable affair.” 

Here for the purpose of a better understanding, the decision made with reference  to the four-fold  *vinayamahâpadesa*  by  Sañgâyana Thera, named  Dhammasangâha  Thera, have been extracted below. 

*Anujânâmi bhikkhave sabbam phalarasam tthapetvâ dhaññaphalarasam* (*Vi.*.-3: 344). Bhikkhus … Except the paddy juice (a cordial made from paddy juice), I permit  

you to have all kinds of fruit juice (a sweet drink made from the fruits). 

In the above *pâli* stanza, the Buddha has prohibited the *bhikkhus* from drinking  the juice made from seven kinds of paddy in the afternoon. 

Palm fruit, coconut, domestic and mountain jackfruit, gourd, pumpkin and three varieties  of  cucumber  and  various  peas  and  beans  are  treated  similar  to  the  paddy.  Although the juice made from these nine kinds of fruit are not directly prohibited from drinking by the *bhikkhus* in the vinayapâli, but are associated with the paddy the juice of which is unsuitable to drink in the afternoon.  Therefore, the juice made from these nine kinds of fruits and peas and beans are not suitable for the *bhikkhus* to consume in the  
.. 
PAGE151

afternoon (*Vi.*-*Ttha*.-3: 384 – 385). 

*Anujânâmi bhimkkuhdadviek aapttâhnaa pm*.*â*  *nsââlnûik aampâbnaapmâ*.*n*  *pahm*.*â*  *rcuoscaakpaâpnâanma*.  *mm*.  *o*(*Vcai*.*p*-3*â*:*n* 3*a*4*m*.4*  )*m*. *adhûkapânam*.*   

Bhikkhûs …. I permit you to consume (if there is evident indication of hunger among  you  in  the  afternoon)  eight  kinds  of  juice:  mango  juice,  black  plum  juice, domestic and wild banana juice, thitmecî juice, grape juice, lotus fruit juice, phet-thet- tayaw fruit juice  (*Vi*.-3: 344). 

These eight kinds of juice are what the Lord has directly permitted the *bhikkhûs* to consume.  With exception of the nine kinds of fruits, the seven kinds of paddy, various kinds of peas and beans, rattan fruit juice, lemon juice, stone apple juice, and various other small fruit juices are similar to the eight kinds of fruit juices permitted.  Even though the small fruit juices are not permitted directly by the Buddha, but are associated with the eight kinds permitted.  Therefore, if there is a strong evidence of thirst among  the bikkhûs in the afternoon, these juices can be consumed (*Vi.-Ttha.-*3: 385). 

These are some instances of decisions  as to whether suitable or not in case of *vinaya*, called ***suttanuloma*,** made by Sangâyanâ Mahâthera with reference to the four  Mahâpadesadhamma. 

**The Four-Fold *Suttanamahâpadesâ*** 

The  Buddha,  *sammâsambuddha*,  who  proclaimed  himself  to  be  omniscient, pentratively knows all there is to know through *sayamabhûñâna* without other’s help.  In the year when He was to succumb to the inexorable law of change the *prinibbâna*, the Buddha was at the *Câpâla cetî* in Vesâli State.  On the fullmoon day of the month of  Tapotwe  (Frebruary)  He  determined,  via  *satisampazañ  ñâna*,  to  get  absorbed  in  the *arahattaphala  phalasamâpatti*,  by  the  three  names  of   *âyusañkhâ*,  *âyupâlaka*  and *jîvitasañkhâra*,  so  as  to  lengthen  His  life  until  the  fullmoon  day  of  Kasun  (May).  Determination  this  way  is  getting  relieved  of  the  *âyusañkhâra*.   From  that  State  the Buddha continued the journey until the City of Bhoga is arrived at.  Here at the Ãnadâ  Cetî, the Buddha preached the **Four-Fold *Suttanamahâpadesa dhamma*** to the *bhikkhus*. 

**The First *Mahâpadesadhamma*** 

\1.  In the domain of this *sâsanâ*, if any monk claims as “this is *dhamma* I have 

heard and received right from the Lord’s mouth.  This is the Doctrine; this is the *Vinaya*;  and this is the discourse”. 

Bhikkhus …. That claim must not be accepted nor rejected right away.  Before accepting or rejecting the claim, it must be consulted word by word with the  *vinaya*  and  *suttana*. 

When consulted this way, if the words do not agree with the *vinaya* nor *suttana*, then it is false claim, and must be decided as “it is not the true utterings of the Buddha, this monk must have learnt erroneously from some others.”  After that decision, the claim  must be disregarded and ignored. 

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the vinaya and suttana when consulted, then it must be taken as “what the monk said is truly the uterrings of the Lord,  he has  learnt rightly.”  Bhikkhus …. Note and remember the *mahâpadesa* in the first place. 

**The Second *Mahâpadesadhamma*** 

Again, Bhikkhus …. If any monk claims as follows. 

PAGE159

“At a certain monastry, *Sanghâ*s headed by a *Thera* are residing.  This is what I have listened to and heard right from that *sanghâ*.  This is the *dhamma*; this is the *vinaya*  and this is the suttana.  It is what the Buddha has admonished.” 

Bhikkhus …. What the monk has said must not be accepted nor rejected at once.  Before accepting or rejecting the claim, it must be consulted word for word with the  *vinaya* and *suttana*. 

In doing so, if what the monk claims does not agree word for word with the *vinaya* and *suttana*, then decide as “what this monk has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it.  Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been  made that way, then condone the whole affair. 

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the vinaya and suttana when consulted, then it must be taken as  “what the  monk said is truly the  uterrings of the  Lord,  he has  learnt rightly.”  Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this second *mahâpadesa*. 

**The Third *Mahâpadesadhamma*** 

Once again, Bhikkhus …. In the domain of this *desanâ*, a certain monk may claim  

as follows. 

“In  a  certain  monastry,  many  a  monks  Thera  are  staying.   They  include *âgamasuta*  = those who  learn  from  listening, *adhigamasuta*  = those  who  learn  from practice, wise and well-versed, those who got *Pâli*, *suttaabhidhammâ, vinaya* and *mâtikâ*,  by heart.  I have listened to and heard right from these *Thera*s.  This is the *dhamma*, this 

is the *vinaya* and this is the Lord’s discourse.” 

Bhikkhus …. Do not accept or reject the claim easily.  It should not be rejected nor accepted as yet.  Note carefully what the monk said and consult with the *vinaya* and  *suttana* word for word. 

In doing so, if what the monk claims is not agreement word for word with the *vinaya* and *suttana*, then decide as “what this monk has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it.  Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been  made that way, then forget the whole affair. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  claim  agrees  with  the  *vinaya*  and  *suttana*  when consulted, then it must be taken as  “what the  monk said is truly the  uterrings of the  

` `Lord,  he has learnt rightly.”  Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this third *mahâpadesa*. 

In doing so, if what the monk claims does not agree word for word with the *vinaya* and *suttana*, then decide as “what this monk has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it.  Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been  made that way, then condone the whole affair. 

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the vinaya and suttana when consulted, then it must be taken as  “what the  monk said is truly the  uterrings of the  Lord,  he has  learnt rightly.”  Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this second *mahâpadesa*. 

**The Fourth *Mahâpadesadhamma*** 

Furthermore, Bhikkhus …. In the domain of this *desanâ*, a certain monk may  claim as follows. 

“In a certain monastry, a *Thera* is staying.  He *âgamasuta* = he who learns from listening, *adhigamasuta* = he who learns from practice, the wise and well-versed, who got *Pâli*, *suttaabhidhammâ, vinaya* and *mâtikâ*,  by heart.  I have listened to and heard  right  from this *Thera*.  This is the *dhamma*, this is the *vinaya* and this is the Lord’s discourse.” 

Bhikkhus …. Do not accept or reject the claim easily.  It should not be rejected nor accepted as yet.  Note carefully what the *Thera* said and consult with the *vinaya* and  *suttana* word for word. 

If what the *Thera* claims is not agreement word for word with the *vinaya* and *suttana*, then decide as “what this *Thera* has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it.  Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been made that way, then forget the whole affair. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  claim  agrees  with  the  *vinaya*  and  *suttana*  when consulted, then it must be taken as  “what the  *Thera* said is truly the  uterrings of the  

` `Lord.  The *Thera* has learnt rightly.”  Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this fourth *mahâpadesa*.  The Buddha exhorted as Bhikkhus …. Note these four-fold *mahâpadesa*. 

These are the four Great Upadesa named *Suttanamahâpadesa* as given in the  *Mahâparinibbânasuttana* (*Dî*.-2: 201 – 204). 

***Anulomakappiya***  = ***Suttânuloma*** 

*Anulomakappiyam pana suttena samintemeva gahetabbam*, *na itaram* (*Dî.-Ttha.-2: 158).* 

If a certain monk claims as “This is the *dhamma*, this is the *vinaya*, and this the  Buddha’s discourses” referring to 

1. The Buddha, 
1. The *Sanghâ*, 
1. A *Thera*, or 
1. The  *Thera*s,  then  you  are  confronted  with  making  decision  on  whether  it  is *dhamma*-*vinaya* or not.  This decision has to be made with refernce to the four- fold *mahâpadesa* as to whether the claim is valid or not.  Any claim in concord with the four-fold *mahâpadesa* is to be taken as the truth.  That which is irrelevent with the four-fold  

`      `*mahâpadas* is not true however much the monk insists that it is. 

If any talk from the other side is, after referring to the four-fold *mahâpadesa*,  ***suttânuloma***, it has to be accepted only if it is consistent with the *Pitakapâli*, called *sutta*,  if not it is not accepted. 

Once again, if the *Pâli* presented by the other side, and even it has been claimed as “to have made with reference *Sañgâyanâ pâli*”, it has to be presented to and passed by the previous three  *sañgâyanâs*.   If it not presented to and passed in this way,  then it  cannot be taken as true (*Dî.-Ttha.-* 2: 157). 

3. ***Ãcariyavâda*** 

*Ãcariyavâdo nâma atthakathâ* (*Dî.-Ttha.-* 2: 158). 

*Ydipi tattha tattha bhagavatâ pavattitapakinnakadesanâva atthakathâ*, *sâ pana dhamma- sañgâhakehi patthamam tîni patikâni sañgâyitvâ tassa attthaovannânupeneva vâcanâ- maggam âropitattâ “**âcariyavâdo**ti vuccati*, *âcariyâ vadanti samvanninti pâli etenâti*.  

*Tenâha – **âcariyavâdo** nâma atthakathâ”ti*.  *Tisso sañgîtiyo ârunhlo eva ca buddhavaca-*

*nassa atthasamvannanâbhûto katthâmaggo mahinadattherena tambapannidîpam âbhto pacchâ tambapanniyehi mahâtherehi sîhalabhâsâya tthapito nikâyantaraladdhisañkara- pariharanattham.*  (*Dî*.- *Tî*.-2: 168 – 169). 

At the time when the Buddha was still alive various *desanâ* = *pâli* admonished by the  Lord himself at various occasions, called *Pakan*. *n*. *a desanâ*, is ***Ãcariyavâda***.  The 

- .. 

.. 

.. 

..  . . 

. 

- . 

learned ones have explained it in the light of *pâlipitaka* and named it as *atthakathâ*.   Then that it is presented by the Noble *Thera*s and sonsulted with the *atthakathâ* at the  *sañgâyanâ*, and with reference to the meaing given by that *atthakathâ* is proceeded to prescribed teaching = *vâcanâmagga*.*   This *atthakathâ* *pakinnadesanâ* is referred to as ***âcariyavâda*** as its *pâlipitaka* has all along been explained by *sañgâyanâ Thera* teachers.  The Reverend Mahâmahinda *Thera* has brought that speech, triply-nominated as *âcariya*- *vâda*, *atthakathâ* and *pakinnadesanâ*, to Sri Lanka.  Lest there might be confusion with the *vâda* of other sects, the Sri Lankan *Thera*s have translated it into Sinhalese language. 

The Reverend  Mahâbuddhaghosa *Thera* condenses the  repetitive explanations of *mahâatthakathâ* = original *pakinnakadesanâ*, written in Sinhalese,  based on the main theme of work.  Proper  *pitaka* in relevent places are put and*  *sanvannetabbapâli* opening *savannâ at*.*t*.*h* *akathâ* are selectively combined.  In some cases are inserted the relevent *pitaka*s extracted from  *Kurnudia*.*t*.*t* *hakathâ*, *Mahâpaccariyaat*.*t*.*h* *akathâ* etc., prevailing at that  time  in  Sri  Lanka.   In  some  cases  still,  decisions  by  the  Great  *Thera*s   like *Mahâpaduma*  *Thera*,  *Mahâsiva  Thera*  etc.  which  are  *attanomati*s,  called  *Theravâda* mentioned and translate the Ceylon *at*.*t*.*h* *akathâ* into *mâgadhi* language = *pâli* language and write a new *at*.*t*.*h* *akathâ* under the title of *Sañgahaat*.*t*.*h* *akathâ*. Of the four-fold *vinaya*,  the third one called *Ãcariyavâda*, is no other than the *at*.*t*.*h* *akathâ*s of the present days. 

*Ãcariyavâdopi suttena samañtoyeva gahetabbo*, *na itaro* (*Dî.-Ttha.-*2: 169). *Pamâdapâtthavesena âcariyavâdassa kadâci pâliyâ asansandan*.*â*. *pi siyâ*, *so na* 

*gahetabboti dassañto âha “âcariyavâdopi suttena samañtoyeva gahetabbo”ti*  (*Dî.-Tî.-2: 169*). 

It may sometimes happen that this *âcariyavâda* (= *pakinnadesanâ* = *atthakathâ*) *pamâdapâttha* (recitation negligently of the traditionally brought along *atthakathâ*, by the *Thera*s),  *pamâdalekha*  (=  writing  and  copying  negligently)  is  not  consulted  with  the *pitakaa*.*t*.*t* *hakathâ*.   Therefore, the  *âcariyavâda* is taken as  true  to  be  only  when  it  is consistent with the *pitakaa*.*t*.*t* *hakathâ*, called *sutta*, and is not to be taken true when it is   inconsistent with the *pitakaa*.*t*.*t* *hakathâ.*  

4. ***Attanomati*** 

*Attanomati nâma nayaggâhena anubuddhiyâ attano patibhânam* (*Dî.-Ttha.*-2: 158). ***Attanomti** nâma theravâdo*.  ***Nayaagâhenâ**ti suttâdito labbhamânanay*.*a*. *ggahanena*. 

***Anubuddhiyâ**ti suttâdîniyeva anugatabuddhiyâ*.  ***Attano patibhânan**ti attano eva tassa  atthassa vuttanayena upatthânam*, *yathâ upatthitâ atthâ eva tathâ vuttâ* (*Dî.-Tî.-*2: 169). 

***Attanomati*** means the *theravâda*s which are the essence of knowledge acquired by means of own analytical way following the three early methods called the *sutta*, *suttâ- nnuloma* and *âcariyavâda*. Expecially the exhortations, described in the *atthakathâ* by the great famous *Thera*s, ***Mahâpadumatheravâda**, **Mahâsumatheravâda***, ***Mahâsivathera- vâda*** etc. are associated with this***  fourth *vinaya* called *attanomati*. 

***Attanomati pana sabbadubbalâ***, *sâpi suttena samantâyeva gahetabbâ, na ittarâ* (*Dî.-  Ttha.-*2: 158). 

***Sabbadubbalâ puggalassa** sayam patibhânabhâvato*.  *Tathâ ca sâpi gahetabbâ, kîdisî?* 

` `*suttena samantayevâti yojanâ* (*Dî.-Tî.-*2: 169). 

Thinking of the various *Thera*s, the *vâda*s, called the *attanomati*, are few and far from complete.  Therefore, the *attanomati* also consulted with *pitakapâli*, referred to as the *sutta*, and is taken to be true only when consistent with it and rejected if it is inconsis- tent. 

Because it has the essence of knowledge acquired by means of own analytical  way following the three early methods called the *sutta*, *suttâ-nnuloma* and *âcariyavâda*, the  *theravâda*,  called  *attanomati*,  is  taken  to  be  far  from  being  complete.   However incomplete it may be, if *attanomati* is consistent with *pitakapâli*, referred to as *sutta*, it  must be accepted. 

This all there is to it with respect to the **four pillars of *sâsanâ***, named the four- fold *vinaya*, which the people of good intension willing to attain *nibbâna* must respect- fully be aware of. 

**Those Who are Deviating from the *Sâsanâ*** 

*Duppatipanno hi sâsanam bhidanto satthudhammasarîre pahâram deti nâma* (*Udâna*- *atthakathâ*- 87).  

`      `An individual who is exercising on the practice inconsistent with the four-fold *vinaya*, referred to as the four pillars of *sâsanâ*, is said to be a *duppatipanna*.  Put in another way, a  person  is  called  a  *duppatipanna*  when  he  does  not  practice  the  right  way  by  not following the instructions by the Buddha called *sâsanadhamma* that is consistent with *pitakapâli* referred to as *sutta* the basic causes  for the purpose of  escaping from the suffering of the *sansâric* circle.  He is the one who is destroying the Buddha’s *sâsanâ*, and is said to be insulting the main body of the Buddha’s  *sâsanâ*,  besides causing dam- mage to it.  This is the real easence of the above *atthakathâ*. 

***Sammâsambuddha Bhâsita Dhamma*** 

The *duppatipanna*, who is wrongly practicing by taking *adhamma* as *dhamma,* and vice versa, has been indicated by the above *udânaatthakathâ* to be causing damage to the *sâsanâ*.   If a meditator is not satisfied with this exultation, then go through the  exhortations given by the *sabbaññusammâsambhuddha* given below. 

*Ye te bhikkhave bhikkhu adhammam “dhammo”ti dîpinti.  Te bhikkhave bhikkhu bahujanaahitâya patipannâ bahujanaasukhâya bahuno janassa anatthâya ahittâya dukkhâya devamanussânam.  Bahuñca te bhikkhave bhikkhu apuññam pasavunti, te*  

*cimam saddhammam antaradhâpinti*  (*Am*.-1: 18). 

*Ye te bhikkhave bhikkhu dhammam “adhammo”ti dîpinti.  Te bhikkhave bhikkhu*  *bahujanaahitâya patipannâ bahujanaasukhâya bahuno janassa anatthâya ahittâya* *dukkhâya devamanussânam.  Bahuñca te bhikkhave bhikkhu apuññam pasavunti, te*  

*cimam saddhammam antaradhâpinti*  (*Am*.-1: 19). 

Bhikkhus …. Certain bhikkhus have explicitly indicated the *adhamma* to be the *dhamma*.  Bhikkhus …. Then they are said to practice for the purpose of poverty, lack of peace  and of  disadvantages  of man and  *devâ*s.   Bhikkhus ….  They  commit  many  a  *kusala* and will bring about the dissolution of the *sâsanâ* (*Am*.-1: 18). 

Bhikkhus …. Certain bhikkhus have explicitly indicated the *dhamma* to be the *adhamma*.  Bhikkhus …. Then they are said to practice for the purpose of poverty, lack of peace  and of  disadvantages  of man and  *devâ*s.   Bhikkhus ….  They  commit  many  a *akusala* and will bring about the dissolution of the *sâsanâ* (*Am*.-1: 19). 

***Dhamma – Adhamma***  

According to *suttana*, the 10 classes of *kusalakammapathadhamma*s* are literally all *dhamma*, and *akusalakammadhamma*s are all *adhamma*.  Similarly the following are all  *dhamma*s: 

1. The Four-Fold *Satipatthâna*, 
1. The Four-Fold  *Sammappadhâna*, 
3. The Four-Fold *Iddhipâda*, 
3. The Four-Fold *Indriya*, 
3. The Five-Fold *Bala* (Five-Fold Force) 
3. The Seven-Fold *Bhojjhañga*, 
3. The Eight-Fold Magga (The Noble Eight-Fold Path). 

These (37) classes of *Bodhipakkhiyadhamma*s are all *dhamma*s. 

The following are all *adhamma*s. 

1. The Three-Fold *Satipatthâna*, 
1. The Three-Fold *Sammappatthâna*, 
1. The Three-Fold *Iddhipâda*, 
1. The Six-Fold *Indriya*, 
1. The Six-Fold *Bala*, 
1. The Eight-Fold *Bhojjhañga*, 
1. The Nine-Fold Magga. 

The four-fold *upâdana*, the five-fold *nîvarana*, the seven-fold *anussayadhâtu*, and  the eight-fold *micchattadhamma* are all *adhamma*s ((*Am.-Ttha*.-1: 65 – 66). 

**Analyse** 

The meditator clinging for attainment of *nibbâna* should again analyze the above 

` `opening of the *atthakathâ*.  A further explanation is given below. 

In the four-fold *satipatthâna*, the Lord has exhorted to make effort in exercise by *vipassana,  bhâvanâ,  kammatthâna,*  step  by  step  by  cultivating  the  *samâdhi*  such  as *ânâpâ*-*nassatisamâdhi,* on *rûpa dhamma* and *nâma dhamma*, referred to as the *kâya- vedanâ-citta-dhamma*, until *arahattaphala* is acquired.  (A broader step-wise explanation  on this will be made later).   This instruction is the *dhamma*. 

Suppose the meditator feels that the disciples cannot attain 28 classes of *rûpa*, mind and mental concomitants, and *nâma dhamma* as expatiated by the Buddha.  Then it  is nothing but indicating the *dhamma* of the Lord as the *adhamma*. 

The  *rûpa*s  naturally  arises  in  the  form  of  *kalâpa*  called  *rûpakalâpa*  particles.  Only when these *rûpakalâpa* particles can be analyzed will the knowledge attain the ultimate reality of the *rûpa*.  It was the belief that the disciples cannot discern these *rûpa*  dhammas. 

`             `Further, *nâma dhammas* naturally are formed by way of *cittaniyâma* called the realms of life and thought process.  The *nâma dhamma*s* formed along the natural course, the *cittaniyâma* at each and every moment the mind and mental concomitants naturally  appear in association with each other.  Within a period of wink, a flash of lightning *citta*- *khana*s arise and perish away billions of times.  It is believed that disciples cannot discern this rapid  formation and  dissolution of the thought  procesesses,  together with the  life- continuum *citta.* 

The words of teacher of such belief are as given below. 

“Although they do not said the Lord has admonished the *rûpanâma dhamma*s the disciples cannot discern”, but what they said implies so.  They do not preach that way, but what they preach implies that they do.   This is kind indicating the  *dhamma*  to be the  

*adhamma*. 

Again, the other side accepted the fact that the disciples cannot discern the *rûpa*- *nâma*s the Buddha has instructed, and instead a replacement was given as “discern the *rûpa-dhamma* this way”, which are not from the Lord.  These instructions are an attempt  

to make the *adhamma* the *dhamma*. 

The Buddha once again exhorted the above 37 classes of *bodhipakkhiyadhamma*s in which are included the practice of the eight-fold path factors.  Among the eight-fold path factors is included the Path of Right Concentration.   These  exhortations  are  the  *dhamma*s. 

`         `If the meditator happens to have said that there is no need to cultivate concentration,  then what he said is making the *dhamma* and *adhamma*. 

In  the  *Mahâsatipatthânasuttana*,  the Buddha  has  expatiated  that  the  First,  the Second, the Third and *Fourth Jhâna Samâdhis* are called the *Sammâsamâdhi*.  (For *sensu*  *lato*, section on Why the Concentration has to be Cultivated). 

`            `Also in the *Visuddhimagga atthakathâ* – ***Cittavisuddhi nâma saupacârâ attha samâpattiyo*** (*Visuddhi-*2: 222) *=* The Buddha has explained that the eight-fold *samâpatti* together with *upacârasamâdhi* are all *cittavisuddhi* and it also is the *dhamma*. If the meditator  said  that  there is  no need to  cultivate concentration,  then  what he  said  is  making the *dhamma* and the *adhamma*. 

In *Mahâsatipatthâna Suttana* (*Dî.-*2: 250 – 251), the Lord has said that the *First*, *Second, Third*  and  *Fourth Jhâna Samâdhi*s  are  called  the  Right Concenteration.  (see  section on Cultivation of *Samâdhi* is a Necessity for broader descriptions). 

Also in *Visuddhimaggaatthakathâ* – ***Cittavisuddhi nâma saupacârâ attha samm- âpattiyo*** (*Visuddhi-*2: 222), it has been expounded that the eight-fold *samâpatti* together with *upacârasamâdhi* are the *cittavisuddhi* (the purity of mind).  These exhortations and instructions are the *dhamma*.  Suppose a meditator is of the idea that it is not necessary to  cultivate concentration, then it is indicating  the *dhamma* as the *adhamma*. 

Again in *Mahâsatipatthâna Suttana* (*Dî.-*2: 239), the Buddha expounded, for the attainment  of  *Arahattaphala*,  to  concentrate  on  the  *rûpa*-*nâma*-cause-result-*sankhâra dhamma* groups of the five-fold aggregate named *Khandhapabba* in section on *Dhammâ- nupassanâsatipatthaâna*.  Here too, it is the *dhamma* involved in four-fold *satipatthâna*.  The Buddha has analytically exhorted these five-fold *khandhâ dhamma*s after acquiring  the Knowledge of Omniscience following the four *asankheyya*s and a million of universe and fullfilling the 30 species of the 10 *pâramî*s.  If a meditator has said that the disciples cannot discern on these five-fold *dhamma*s (= *rûpa*-*nâma*), and made a remark as “These are the descriptive *dhamma*s”.  The what he said is no other than turning the *dhamma* into  *adhamma*. 

If a meditator makes a remark as “These are the descriptive *dhamma*s, and in practice in the mediatation centres, concentration is made this way,” then it also is a kind of making the *dhamma* an *adhamma*.  Because it has been expatiated by the Omniscient *sammâsambuddha* himself in ***Aparijânana Suttana*** (*Sam*.-2: 249 – 250) that if the five- fold clinging aggregate = *rûpa*-*nâma* *dhamma*s are not known analytically by three  *pariññâ paññâ*, then there is no end to the suffering of the *sansâric* circus. 

Again in ***Anattalakkhana Suttana*** etc. of various *teparivutta dhamma desanâ*s, the Buddha has instructed to meditate on the past five-fold *khandhâ*s and the future five- fold *khandhâ*s. Throughout the *Khandhavaggasamyutta pâli* and in various *nikâya* too, such exhortations have been made,wherever pertinent, for hundreds of times.  It also is the *dhamma*.  If a meditator, for instance, has said that the *vipassanâ* exercise must not and should not be made on the past and future factors, then it is a clear indication of the  *dhamma* to be an *adhamma*. 

Indeed, *vipassanâ* is the meditation work on the three general characters, taking each in turn as the object, of the five-fold clinging aggreagtes = *rûpa* and *nâma* *dhamma*s of the past,  future  and  present located  in the  *santâna* within  and  without.   The medi- taion is made as below –   

*So kâlena ijjhattam sammati, kâlena bahiddhâ* ( *Abhi.-Ttha.-*1: 270). 

*So kâlena rûpam sammati, kâlena arûpam* (*Abhi.-Ttha.-*1: 271). 

1. At times on the internal five-fold aggragates, 
1. At times on the external five-fold aggragates, 
1. At times on the *rûpa dhamma*, 
1. At times on the *nâma dhamma*.  It is not work one can do as one wishes by 

discerning on the *paññatti* grossly without differentiating and without undestanding the  *paññatti* and *paramatha* separately. 

In *Mahânidâna Suttana* (*Dî.*-2: 47 – 60), the Lord has again expounded that with- out  penetrative  realization,  by  *anubodha  ñâna*  and  *pativedha  ñâna,*  of  the  *paticca- samuppâda*,  the causal relationship,  one cannot overcome the suffering of  the sansâric  circus. 

` `Openings in the great *atthakathâ* too (*Visuddhi-*2: 221*; Abhi.-Ttha.-*1: 189),  have definitely given as “the cycle of life (arising and perishing away of life), referred to as the  causal-relationship the *paticcasamuppâda*, is continually torturing the sentient beings like thunderbolt.  No one has ever dreamed of the fact that unless it is eradicated  by a knife- like *ñâna* sharpened on a whet stone-like  *samâdhi* can anyone be relieved from the  sansâric circus of sufferings.  These exhortations and instructions are all the *dhamma*. 

Furthermore, the distinct arising of the resultant present five-fold *khandhâ*s such as *viññâna*, *nâma-rûpa*, *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedanâ* because of the past causes such as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sañkhâra* and *kamma* cultivated during the previous existence.  Because  of  the  present  causes  such  as  *avijjâ*,  *tahnâ*,  *upâdâna*,  *sañkhâra*  and  *kamma* cultivated during the present existence, the future resultant five-fold *khandhâ*s such as *viññâna*, *nâma-rûpa*, *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedanâ* would clearly arise.  Only when these are realized penetratively in their true nature by the *anubodhaññâna*  and  *pativedhañâna*,  will the causal relationship, the *paticcasamuppâda* factors be understood. 

In this case, the assertion the past five-fold *khandhâ*s refers to just a part of the five-fold *khandhâ*s.  In the same way the present five-fold *khandhâ*s and the future five- fold *khandhâ*s refer to just a portion of the five-fold *khandhâ*s respectively.  Therefore, the nature of causal relationship, the *paticcasamuppâda*, cannot be dissociated with the five-fold  *khandhâ*s  of the past and future.  It is not a phenomenon that can be discerned  separately from the past-future five-fold *khandhâ*s. 

`         `Therefore, if a meditator accepts the fact that the past-future phenomena should not be discerned, then the penetrative discerning of the *paticcasamuppâda* by one’s own self would be nonsense for him in practical works.  If the meditator agrees with this assertion,  then he is indicating the *dhamma* as an *adhamma*. 

If a meditator stated that “the past-future five-fold *khandh*âs cannot be realized penetratively by one self via *paccakkhañâna*, can be known speculatively only via the *anumânañâna*,” then he is indicating the *dhamma* as an *adhamma*.  It is because the Noble Ones penetratively realized the causal relationship by both the *anumânañâna* and  the *pativedhañâna*. 

*Sotâpannânañca nâma paccayâkâro uttânakova hutvâ upatthâti* (*Dî.-Ttha.-*2: 83). 

In accordance with the Buddha’s exhortation in *Añguttorapâli* (*Am.-*1: 18 – 19), the act of asserting the *dhamma* to an *adhamma* means causing suffering and disturbance of peace among the sentient beings and perishing away of the Buddha’s *sâsanâ*. If the meditator does not wish to be one causing the perishing of the *sâsana*, all he has to do is to indicate the *dhamma* as the true *dhamma*, and to practice in accordance with the true  *dhamma*. 

The meditator should remember the case of the monk Kapila, during the period of the Lord *Kassapa*, who has taken the *dhamma* as *adhamma* and the *adhamma* as the *dhamma*.    The meditator should carefully examine the *patipatti* practice he is exercising and explaining (to others) if they are relevent to the four-fold *vinaya*, especially to the *pitaka* named *sutta*.  If the meditator recognizes definitely that the *patipatti* practice he is exercising is inconsistent with the Buddha’s *pitaka*, then he must be bold enough to easily discard the practice.  If not, the meditator will be one of those who are damaging  the right way of practice of the *sâsanâ*. 

***Bikkhusuttana*** 

*Tassamâ tiha tvum bhikkhu âdimeva visovehi kusalesu dhammesu.  Ko câdi kusalânam dhammânam, sîlañca sivisuddham ditthi ca ujukâ.  Yato kho te bhikkhu sîlañca suvisud- dham bhvissati, ditthi ca ujukâ.  Tato tvum bhikkhu sîlam nissâya sîle patitthâya cattâro*  

*satipatthâne tividhena bhâveyâsi* (*Sam*.-3: 124). 

***Ditthî**ti kammassakatâditthi* (*Sam.-Ttha.-*3: 234). 

My  son  bhikkhu  ….  So  in  the  framework  of  this  *sâsanâ*,  purify  the  *kusala* *dhamma* to begin with.  The where is the beginning of the *kusala dhamma*s?    They are the pure morality* and *kammassakatâ*, the right understanding, called the straightforward  view which understands the *kamma* and it consequences. 

My son bhikkhu …. At times in your *santâna* may arise good and pure morality and *sammassakata*, the right understanding, referred to as straightforward view. Then, on the basis of, and grasping firmly on, the morality cultivate the foru-fold *satipatthâna* by  way the three pehnomena –  

1. Internal, 
1. External, 
1. Internal-external  (*Sam*.-3: 124). 

Relevent to these *desanâ*s, the first and foremost prerequisite for **a monk of an auspicious night** is the (*sîla*) morality.  The second prerequisite is the *samâdhi* (concen- tration).  The third is the knowledge acquired through practice on the basis of any one of the four-fold *satipatthâna*, of the *ânâpânassatisamâdhi* etc., following the instructions given by the Buddha.   For a meditator competent with morality, practice must be made so as to be competent with *samâdhi*, but before going on to it, explanation will be made first as to **why concentration has to be cultivated**.**  
