***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

***NIBBĀNA*** GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**THE CONCENTRATION SHOULOD BE DEVELOPED** 

**VOLUME I Page 501 – 550** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiṭakadhara*)** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE41

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE 501** 

**5. *nirodhā* *nisams***    ***ā*** 

By taking into heart that after eight kinds of absorptions (*samāpatti*) had been occurred and cessation absorption (*niroda samāpatti*) had been entered for throughout seven days without consciousness of any kind, it will be reached into the eternal peace called *nibbāna* which is cessation of these three kinds of sufferings, 

1. ***dukkha* *dukkha*** (bodily disagreeable feeling) 
1. ***viparin***  ***ā***  ***ma* *dukkha*** (bodily and mentally agreeable feelings) 
1. ***sańkhāra  dukkha***  (feeling  of  neutrality  associating  with  all  kinds  of  *sańkhāra* *dhamma*), 

such Noble Ones called non-returnee (*anāgāmi*) and arahants develop the concentration of full absorption. The concentration of full absorption of those Noble Ones has the advantage of the cessation absorption (*niroda samāpatti*) called ***nirodhānisams***    ***ā***. (*Visuddhi*-1-369) 

The cessation absorption (*niroda samāpatti*) is a kind of absorption in which the consciousness, mental concomitants and corporealities produce by mind are ceased totally. Those corporealities produced by *kamma*, temperature and nutriment remains without cessation take place. Those corporeal *dhamma* are also being oppressed by continuous process of arising and passing away with the result that it is designated as *sańkhāra* *dukkha*. The commentator explained that “***sukham*****    ***v*** ***iharissāma*** = it will be staying with totally happiness” due to absence of mind resulting in similarity to lack of any kind of suffering when cessation absorption occurs although those kind of suffering called *sańkhāra* *dukkha* is still present. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-460) 

These are advantages which can be attained by means of concentration. In this paper, the way of practice of concentration is presented in order to attain the right view on Four Noble Truths as they really are, called ***vipassanā* *nisams***    ***ā***, number two advantage only. However, if the *meditator* has desire to practise four protective meditations (*catu* *rārakkha* *kammat* *t* *hāna*) called, 

1. loving-kindness (***mettā***) 
1. recollection of the nobility of the Buddha (***buddhā* *nussati***) 
1. recollection of the death (***maranā***     ***nussati***) 
1. loathsomeness (***a-subbha***), 

before *vipassanā* practice is carried out, it is very appropriate time after the concentration of the fourth absorption through the mindfulness of breathing has been fulfilled actually. (It can be seen in Section Nine *Samatha* *kammat* *t* *hāna*, Volume V.) 

If the *meditator* wants to fulfil *vipassanā* knowledge, it will be better to endeavour in order to complete eight kinds of noble qualities of the fourth absorption previously. 

**PAGE 502** 

**3.11.A. Eight noble qualities of the fourth absorption** 

*so evam*  *samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anańgan* *e vigatūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye t* *hite āneñjappatte āsavānam*  *khayañān* *āya cittam*  *abhininnāmeti*. *so idam dukkhanti yathābhūtam*  *pajānāti*, *ayam*  *dukkhasamudayoti yathābhūtam*  *pajānāti*, *ayam*  *dukkhanirodhoti yathābhūtam*  *pajānāti*, *ayam*  *dukkhanirodhagāminī pat* *ipadāti yathābhūtam*  *pajānāti*.* (*M*-1-347) 

Above Pāl i Quotation is an excerpt how *vipassanā* practice can be fulfilled after the concentration of fourth absorption had been developed, found in *Mahāassapura* *Sutta*. This kind of preaching methodology in enormous times in Pāl i Text. This is the instruction of the Buddha himself in order to know the Four Noble Truths as they really are, by means of endeavouring  to fulfil eight noble qualities of the fourth absorption previously. According to those explanations found in *Visuddhi*-2-5, *Vinaya*-Commentary-1-127, each noble quality would be presented in this place. 

1. ***parisuddha* = the purification** 

The consciousness of fine material sphere which is occurring as the concentration of the fourth absorption in the continuum of *meditator* is circumstantially purified due to presence of purification of mindfulness caused by equanimity (*upekkhā*). In this case, *upekkhā* mans the mental concomitant called *tatramajjhattatā* (equanimity). This equanimity is capable of neutralizing the mind not to reach any kind of extremity, i.e. retarding to take object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing called laziness (*kosajja*) and enhancing to take object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing called unrest (*uddhacca*). Due to capability of neutralizing of the mind on the object of sign of full concentration, that mental concomitant is designated as *tatramajjhattupekkhā*. Due to presence of efficiency of *tatramajjhattupekkhā*, the mindfulness which is able to keep in mind that sign of full concentration is well purified. Due to presence of purification of mindfulness caused by that *upekkhā* the consciousness of the fourth absorption is also circumstantially purified. It is well purified not only the mindfulness but also all associating *dhamma*, indeed. It had been preached emphatically on the mindfulness. (*Visuddhi*-1-163) 

2. ***pariyodāta* = presence of brilliant shyness** 

“*parisuddhattāyeva* ***pariyodāte*** *pabassareti* *vuttam*  *hoti*” (*Visuddhi*-2-5, *Vi*-Com-1-

\127) 

Due to presence of circumstantial purification in that way it is shining brilliantly as well purified  gold.(According  to  this  explanation  it  should  be  recognized  on  the  fact  the concentration of fourth absorption has brilliant shines.) 

**PAGE 503** 

3. ***a-nańgana***     **= free from impurities of greed, anger** 

It is free from impurities of mind called greed and anger due to rejecting for long time (*vikkhambhana* *pahāna*) of both bodily and mentally agreeable feelings (*sukha*, *somanassa* *vedanā*) which are causes of occurrence of greed (*lobha*), and bodily and mentally disagreeable feelings (*dukkha*, *domanassa* *vedanā*) which are causes of occurrence of anger (*dosa*). 

4. ***vigatūpakkilesa* = free from defilements** 

If the lust and anger are abandoned for a long time, those defilements (*kilesa* *dhamma*) which are associating with lust and anger are also abandoned well. As those lust and anger are deserving to designated as ***ańgan***  ***a***   (impurity) due to occurrence of unpurified *dhamma* of those lust and anger, similarly, those are deserving to designated as *upakkilesa* (defilement) due to ability to occur dirtiness of mind. Due to free from impurity and dirtiness of mind in that way it is free from defilements which are capable of burning and suppressing the mind. It is right. — Those defilements and impurity (*ańgan* *a*) such as lust and anger, are capable of burning and suppressing the mind. (*Visuddhi*-2-5; *Mahāt* *īkā*-2-6,7) 

5. ***mudubhūta* = elasticity** 

Due to occurrence of well developed by reaching in five kinds of mastery of the fourth absorption thoroughly, the continuum of mind is elastic as a leather which had been well tanned to make easily whatever he likes or a block of sealing wax which had been well treated. In this case, “well developed” means the concentration of fourth absorption would be developed frequently. As an animal skin becomes fine by tanning frequently, this mind of fourth absorption is also very fine and subtle due to entering frequently into it. It means that the fine and subtle mind is reaching into mastery (***vasī* *bhāva* *patta***). It is right. — It can be said the mind which occurs in indulgent situation as one wish, is elastic. (*Visuddhi*-2-5; *Mahāt* *īkā*-2-7) 

6. ***kammaniya* = adaptability in practice** 

As the purified gold is very easy to make any kind of jewellery whatever he likes, such as rings, bracelets etc., due to presence of elasticity of the mind which is free from impurity and defilements is adaptable to perform any function whatever he likes, the function of super-psychic-knowledge (*abhiññān* *a*) or the function of *vipassanā* practice etc. 

*tañca ubhayampi subhāvitattāyevāti* (*Visuddhi*-2-5; *Vi*-Com-1-127) 

It should be recognized on the fact that those two kinds, elasticity (*mudubhūta*) and adaptability (*kammaniya*) of the mind would be occurred after it had been well developed proficiently by means of reaching into five mastery of that mind of fourth absorption. 

**PAGE 504** 

*nāham*  *bhikkhave aññam*  *ekadhammampi samanupassāmi*, *yam*  *evam*  *bhāvitam*  *bahulīkatam*  *muduñca hoti kammaniyañca*, *yathayidam*  *bhikkhave cittam* . (*Ańg*-1-4) 

- *Bhikkhu*s … I (the Buddha) never see any *dhamma* which is very elastic and 

adaptable to perform the function of practice rather than this mind which had been developed frequently to reach in mastery is very elastic and adaptable to perform the function of practice. (*Ańg*-1-4) 

7. ***t*** ***h***   ***ita* = presence of stability** 

Due to well developed not to avoid and perish away those noble qualities, such as circumstantial purification (*parisuddha*) etc, the continuum of mind is not loosely in those noble qualities but firmly fixed well actually. That stability of consciousness of the fourth absorption called *t* *hita*. 

8. ***āneñjappatta* = reaching into unshaken condition** 

Due to presence of stability in that way it is no shaking anymore in the mind of meditation. It means that due to presence of stability, the mind of meditation is very quiet on the object. It would be preached in this preaching methodology that the consciousness of fourth absorption which is firmly fixed to the object, as both *t* *hita* and *āneñjappatta*. 

In the commentary called *Visuddhi Magga*, the meanings of *t* *hita* and *āneñjappatta* are explained in another ways as follows. 

7. *t* *hita* = presence of stability 

Due to presence of elasticity and adaptability of mind in order to achieve various functions, such as, super-psychic-knowledge, *vipassanā* practice etc., the continuum of mind is stable as one’s indulgence whatever he wishes. (*Visuddhi*-2-5) 

It means that ***t***  ***h***  ***ita*** (= **stability**) is a situation which occurs as one’s desire or a situation which reaches into mastery. In previous method — with regarding to the phrase, “***vase vattamānam******    ***h***  ***i cittam******    ***m***  ***udunti vuccati***” = “it can be said the mind which occurs in indulgent situation as one’s wish, is elastic”, it had been shown that the consciousness of fourth absorption which reaches into mastery is elastic (***mudu***). It had also been shown that due to presence of elasticity, various functions of practices are adaptable (***kammaniya***). Thus as if it is reaching into mastery it would be recognized as the occurrence of elasticity and adaptability, similarly due to reaching into mastery, the occurrence of stability would be recognized as occurrence of elasticity and adaptability. It means that it should be recognized reciprocally. As the resultant *dhamma* can be explicit by causal *dhamma*, similarly causal *dhamma* should be explicit by resultant *dhamma*. Therefore, by means of occurrence of avoiding from shaking, the stability with firmly fixed situation is called *āneñjappatta*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-2-7) 

**PAGE 505** 

8. ***āneñjappatta* = reaching into unshaken condition** 

The continuum of mind which is associating with that concentration of fourth absorption called *āneñjappatta*, occurs by means of efficiency of six kinds of strengths or six chiefs called faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration, wisdom and light (= *obhāsagata*) resulting in the occurrence of both opposite *dhamma*. The efficiency of those six kinds of strengths or six chiefs is so great that there is no trace of shaking caused by opposite *dhamma*, such as faithless laziness, carelessness, unrest, delusion = wrong knowing = misunderstanding, falling in darkness of defilements etc. No trace of faithless can infiltrate in the continuum of mind even as vapour. It will be explicit. — 

1) That consciousness of fourth absorption which had been well developed up to 

reaching in five kinds of mastery in this way, which had been soaked by firm faith occurred as “it is deserving to face with *abhiññān* *a* *dhamma* and Four Noble Truths which should be faced with special knowledge”, which had been well supported by strength of faith and chief of faith, would not be shaken by opposite *dhamma*, faithless (*assaddiya*). Actually, it situates as performance in order to occur successive upper supra-mundane *dhamma*. 

2) The consciousness which had been soaked with strenuous effort, which had been 

supported by strenuous effort that is capable of finishing to admonish the former, would not be shaken by laziness (*kosajja*) that is a kind of unwholesome mind moment, a cause of 

occurrence of lazy person. 

3) The consciousness which had been soaked with mindfulness, which is capable of 

finishing not to unforget repeated performing the practice of fourth absorption, which is capable of repeated searching the occurrence of wholesome *dhamma*, which had been supported by very strong mindfulness, would not be shaken by carelessness (*pamāda*) which is forgetting to do wholesome deeds. 

4) The consciousness which had been soaked with concentration, which had been 

supported by concentration that is capable of putting the mind on the object of practice, would not be shaken by unrest (*uddhacca*). 

5) The consciousness which had been soaked with wisdom, which had been 

supported by wisdom that has the characteristic of discriminating between benefittable and unbenefittable *dhamma* of that practice of mindfulness of breathing, would not be shaken by ignorance (*avijjā*), opposite *dhamma* of knowledge. 

6) “*obhāsagatam*  *kilesandhakārena* *na* *iñjati*”. (*Visuddhi*-2-6) 

**PAGE 506** 

***Obhāsagata**nti ñān* *obhāsasahagatam* . *obhāsabhūtena hi* 

*yathāvuttasamādhānasam* *vaddhitena ñān* *ena sam* *kilesapakkham*  *yāthāvato passanto tato utrasanto ottappanto tam*  *adhibhavati*, *na tena abhibhūyati*. *tenāha* “*kilesandhakārena na iñjatī*”*ti*. *etena ñān* *apariggahitam*  *hirottappabalam*  *dasseti*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-2-8) 

The concentration of fourth absorption which occurs associating with the light of wisdom, would not be shaken by darkness called defilements. It is right. — Due to occurrence of really knowing and seeing unpurified *dhamma* (*sam* *kilesa*) by the knowledge which had been well developed by concentration associating with the light that has the function of enlightening (*obhāsana* *rasa*) Four Noble Truths as they really are, it would be suppressed on those all kinds of unpurified *dhamma* by fearing on it. That concentration of fourth absorption associating with knowledge and light would not be suppressed by those all kinds of unpurified *dhamma*. Therefore, the commentator explained that “**the concentration of fourth absorption which occurs associating with the light of wisdom, would not be shaken by darkness called defilements**”. With regarding to this word, it shows apparently on the strength called shame (*hirī*), dread (*otappa*) which are supported by knowledge. 

(*upekkhā*-2-6; *Mahāt* *ī*-2-8) 

The consciousness which had been soaked, kept, supported by these six kinds of *dhamma*, (1) faith, (2) effort, (3) mindfulness, (4) concentration, (5) wisdom and (6) *obhāsa* *gata* = efficiency of light = strength of shame and dread, can be designated as reaching into occurrence of unshaken situation (***āneñjappatta***). 

In this method, it would not be counted on ***samāhita*** as one factor, but *t* *hita* and *āneñjappatta* are separated into two factors. In another method, it would be counted on *samāhita* as one factor and then *t* *hita* and *āneñjappatta* are also united as one factor. 

**3.11.B. Eight noble qualities of the fourth absorption (another way of explanation)** 

1. ***samāhita*** — The continuum of consciousness is well stable by concentration of fourth absorption. 
1. ***parisuddha***  — Due to occurrence of very far from impurities called hindrances the continuum of consciousness is circumstantially purified. 
1. ***pariyodāta*** — Due to occurrence of overcoming on gross factors of absorption called *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*, *sukha*, which are capable of fearing, and shaking the mind, the continuum of consciousness is well purified with brilliant shininess. 

[**Notes**: — In this method, it mentioned on “***parisuddha***” as free from hindrances which are capable of impurifying the mind; while on “***pariyodāta***” as free from *vitakka* and *vicāra* that are capable of shaking mind, *pīti* that is capable of making conspicuous appearance of mind, *sukha* that is capable of taking into heart and feeling the object with happiness, respectively. Although the first absorption can be attained only when it is far from hindrances, it is not far from those hindrances compared with this fourth absorption, actually. Similarly, although the second absorption is far from *vitakka* and *vicāra*, the third absorption is far from *pīti*, it is not far from those *dhamma* compared with this  

**PAGE 507** 

fourth absorption, actually. Therefore, it is explained on this fourth absorption as “*parisuddha*”, “*pariyodāta*”. (*Mahat* *ī*-2-8) 

4. ***a-nańgan***  ***a***   — Due to absence of unwholesome impurities, such as conceit (*māna*), wickedness (*māyā*), pretension (*sāt* *heya*), which can be infiltrated with inferior wish occurring depending on attainment of absorption, it is far from unwholesome impurities. (*Visuddhi*-2-6) 

Depending on attainment of absorption, a kind of conceit which is too much pride in oneself can be occurred. A kind of desire with conceit that “during the Supreme Buddha is preaching among surroundings of disciples, it will be very good situation as if the Buddha always questions me only that “*bhikkhu* … how do you suggest on this *dhamma*” etc., can usually be occurred. The wickedness (***māyā***) which desires to conceal obvious fault can usually be occurred. The pretension (***sāt***  ***h***  ***eya***) which is capable of pretending to be full of noble qualities that are not present, can also be occurred. Those *dhamma* called ‘conceit’, wickedness’, ‘pretension’ are commonly known as ***pāpaka* *icchāvacara*** (inferior wishes). Although these *dhamma* are not so gross as hindrances, these are **subtle unwholesome deeds** called ***ańgan***  ***a***   (impurity), due to ability to make dirty of continuum of mind. (*Mahat* *ī*-2-8,9) 

5. ***vigatūpakkilesa*** — It is free from those *upakkilesa* *dhamma*, such as greed (*abhijjhā*) etc. which are capable of making dirty of mind. [*abhijjhā* (greed) is a kind of desire which is subtle greed attaching on absorption of oneself but not reach as sensual hindrance (*kāmacchanda* *nīvaran* *a*). It is unrejectable subtle greed by the first absorption. In the word, “greed (*abhijjhā*) etc.”, with regarding to “**etc**.”, it should be interpreted on subtle conceit, wickedness and pretension etc. (*Mahat* *ī*-2-8,9)] 
5. ***mudubhūta*** — Due to occurrence of having in five kinds of mastery, it is well elastic. 
5. ***kammaniya*** — Due to reaching in foundation of various efficiency (*iddhi*), it is well adaptable to perform any kind of function of practice relating to *dhamma* whatever he likes. 
5. ***t*** ***h***   ***ita***, ***āneñjappatta*** — Due to fulfilment  of practice of the fourth absorption which is the fundamental factor of the mind leading to desired objects, such as the object of super- psychic-knowledge or the object of *vipassanā*, and due to fulfilment  of practice of concentration which is adaptable for “*abhinīhāra*” called all kinds of supreme perfections (*pāramita*) that is capable of leading to any kind of enlightenment, i.e. enlightenment of the Buddha, enlightenment of the *pacceka* Buddha, enlightenment of disciple, by means of absence of further function of concentration rather than the fourth absorption, with the result that that concentration of fourth absorption had reached to significant role in continuing the way of practice, that kind of concentration situates in firmly fixed condition which reaches to superior occurrence without shaking anymore. 

(It is ready to lead the mind either toward various kinds of super-psychic-knowledge, such as *iddhi* *vidha* *abhiññān* *a* etc, or toward various kinds of knowledge called *vipassanā* knowledge, the Path-Knowledge, the Fruit-Knowledge. The practice of the fourth absorption which is ready to apply in that way is designated as “*abhi nīhīrakkhama* *bhāvanā*”. Due to fulfilment  of that “***abhi* *nīhārakkhama* *bhāvanā***”, that practice of the fourth absorption 

plays the most important role in  **PAGE 508** 

various ways of practices called *samāpatti*, *vipassanā*, indeed. That kind of concentration is not only superior but also capable of making non-contentment. It is never content even though it had been entered for a long time in that absorption. Thus it means that this concentration of fourth absorption is very stable due to reaching into unshaken situation resulted from superior occurrence of ***abhi* *nīhārakkhama* *bhāvanā***.) (*Visuddhi*-2-6; *Mahāt* *ī*- 2-9) 

Actually, this concentration of fourth absorption which is completed with these eight noble qualities is adaptable and ready to lead the mind toward various kinds of functions of practices, such as creating by super-psychic-knowledge, *vipassanā* etc. If the mind of meditation is intended to be led toward the object of *vipassanā* knowledge, those *sańkhāra* *dhamma* called the Noble Truth of Suffering and the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering (= corporeality, mentality, causes and results) will be easily known and seen by penetrative knowledge due to presence of adaptability of the concentration of fourth absorption for various ***abhinīhāra***. 

Those supreme perfections (*pāramita*) which are factors of reaching to desired Enlightenment called Enlightenment of the Buddha, Enlightenment of the *pacceka* Buddha, Enlightenment of disciple, belong to these practices of *abhiññān* *a* and *vipassanā*. 

These are explanations relating to eight noble qualities of the fourth absorption. In accordance with this explanations, the brief translations of those Pāl i Quotations mentioned above in (3.11.A, **PAGE 502**) (*M*-1-347), are as follows: — 

The meditating *bhikkhu* who had well attained that fourth absorption with the consciousness, 

1. if it is circumstantially purified due to presence of purification of mindfulness 

caused by *upekkhā* (equanimity) called mental concomitant, “***tatramajjhattatā***,” which is capable of well putting the mind on various objects of sign of full concentration, such as object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing, 

2. if it has brilliant shining in colour due to occurrence of **circumstantial** 

**purification**, 

3. if it lacks those impurities called lust and anger due to presence of abandoned 

impurities by means of rejecting for a long time (***vikkhambhana* *pahāna***) resulted from abandoning of both bodily and mentally agreeable feelings which are the causes of lust, and bodily and mentally disagreeable feelings which are the causes of anger, 

4. if it is avoiding from those defilements which are capable of burning and 

suppressing the mind due to occurrence of lacking impurities called lust and anger, 

**PAGE 509** 

5. if it is **well subtle** (if it is reaching into five kinds of mastery) due to occurrence of 

fulfilment  to develop thoroughly, 

6. if it is well adaptable for various functions of practices, such as endeavouring  to 

know and see the Four Noble Truths (*catusacca* *kammat* *t* *hāna* *bhāvanā*) due to occurrence of subtle condition, 

7. if it is well situated as indulgent condition of oneself, due to presence of elasticity 

and adaptability of concentration of fourth absorption, 

8. if it is reached into occurrence of unshaken condition due to presence of supporting 

of five controlling faculties i.e. faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration, wisdom, inclines to attain *arahatta* *magga ñān* *a* (the Fourth Path-Knowledge) called ***āsavakkhaya*** which is lost of leaking *dhamma* (cankers). That *bhikkhu* knows that 

1. this is the Noble Truth of Suffering (***dukkha* *ariya* *sacca***) 
1. this is the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering (***samudaya* *ariya* *sacca***) 
1. this is the Noble Truth of Cessation of Suffering (***nirodha* *ariya* *sacca***) 
1. this is the Noble Truth of Course leading to cessation of suffering (***magga* *ariya*** 

***sacca***) as they really are. (*M*-1-347) [It would be translated in accordance with explanations found in ***Visuddhi*-2-5**.] 

The *meditator* who wants to improve *vipassanā* practice depending upon the concentration of this fourth absorption must fulfil frequently in order to complete with above noble eight qualities ob concentration of fourth absorption. It should be practiced in order to reach five kinds of mastery and to occur the concentration of fourth absorption which is strongly supported by five controlling faculties. Only when it reaches to above situations well, various functions of practices, keeping in mind and discriminating on five aggregates called the Noble Truth of Suffering and causal relationship or the nature of Dependence- Origination called the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering, will be adaptable. The function of taking into heart those *sańkhāra* *dhamma* called those Noble Truth of Suffering and Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering (*vipassanā* *bhinivesa*) will be put through successfully. 

It would be continued to present on number two quality, “***pariyodāta***”, = “if it is brilliant shining in colour”, as follows. — 

**PAGE 510 3.12 The light of wisdom — *Obhāsa* *Sutta*** 

*cattārome bhikkhave obhāsā*. *katame cattāro*, *candobhāso sāriyobhāso aggobhāso paññobhāso*. *ime kho bhikkhave cattāro obhāsā*. *etadaggam*  *bhikkhave imesam*  *catunnam*  *obhāsānam yadidam*  *paññobhāso*. (*Ańg*-1-457) 

- *Bhikkhu*s … there are four kinds of lights. Which are of four kinds that — the light of moon, the light of sun, the light of fire, the light of wisdom, indeed. *Bhikkhu*s … among those four kinds, the light of wisdom is the supreme one. (*Ańg*-1-457) 

The Buddha preached in similar way by using synonyms, *ābhā* = colour, *pabhā* = rays, *āloka* = light, *pajjota* = shining light. Those explanations relating with the light of wisdom can be found in the Commentary, *At* *t* *hasālinī*, as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

**3.12.A. The light of knowledge** 

*pajānātīti paññā*. *kim*  *pajānāti*? “*idam*  *dukkha*”*ntiādinā nayena ariyasaccāni*. 

*at* *t* *hakathāyam*  *pana* “*paññāpetīti paññā*”*ti vuttam* . *kinti paññāpetīti*? “*aniccam*  *dukkham*  *anattaā*”*ti paññāpeti*. *Sāva avijjāya abhibhavanato adhipatiyat* *t* *hena indriyam* , *dassanalakkhan* *e vā indat* *t* *ham*  *kārotīti indriyam* , *paññāva indriyam*  *paññindriyam* . 

*sā panesā obhāsanalakkhan* *ā ca paññā*, *pajānanalakkhan* *ā ca*. *yathā hi catubhittike gehe rattibhāge dīpe jalite andhakāro nirujjhati*, *āloko pātubhavati*, *evameva obhāsanalakkhan* *ā paññā*. *paññobhāsasamo obhāso nāma natthi*. *paññavato hi ekapallańkena nisinnassa dasasahassilokadhātu ekālokā hoti*. *tenāha thero\_\_\_\_* 

“*yathā mahārāja puriso andhakāre gehe padīpam*  *paveseyya*, *pavit* *t* *ho padīpo andhakāram*  *viddham* *seti obhāsam*  *janeti*, *ālokam*  *vidams* *eti*, *pākat* *āni ca rūpāni karoti*, *evameva kho mahārāja paññā uppajjamānā avijjandhakāram*  *viddhams* *eti vijjobhāsam*  *janeti*, *ñān* *ālokam*  *vidam* *seti*, *pākat* *āni ariyasaccāni karoti*. *evam*  *kho mahārāja obhāsanalakkhan* *ā paññā*”*ti*. (*Milinda* *pañhā*-38; *Abhi*-Com-1-165,166) 

- The nature of distinguishing knowledge is called **wisdom** (***paññā***). Which would be distinguished by knowledge is that — in the aspect of ***Abhidhamma***, the Four Noble Truths would be distinguished that all *dhamma* found in three worlds among 31 realms, except the craving (*tahn* *ā*) are the Noble Truth of Suffering, etc. while in the aspect of ***Suttanta***, it would be distinguished that those *dhamma*, birth (*jāti*) etc., are the Noble Truth of Suffering etc. In other words, in the olden days commentary called ***Mahā* *att***     ***h***   ***akathā***, it had been explained that the nature which is capable of distinguishing is called the wisdom (*paññā*). How it would be capable of distinguishing is that — it is distinguishable as *anicca* (impermanence), *dukkha* (suffering), *anatta* (non-self). 

**PAGE 511** 

Due to ability to suppress the ignorance called wrong knowing resulting in the meaning as occurrence of chief in penetrative knowing on the Four Noble Truths, that wisdom is called the controlling faculty (***indriya***). In other words, due to ability to occur controlling factor of knowing and seeing on the Four Noble Truths, it is designated as 

controlling faculty (*indriya*). That wisdom has both the characteristic, the nature of showing in order to distinguish true nature of the object and the characteristic, “thorough distinguishing”. 

For example — When the oil-light is shined at night in dark house covered by four walls, the darkness which is capable of blinding the normal eye would be ceased, and the light shines apparently. Similarly to this example, the wisdom (*paññā*) has the characteristic shining in order to distinguish the real nature of object as oil-light. There is no light similar to the light of wisdom. It is right. If the person with *vipassanā* knowledge practices in sitting position, ten thousand-fold world systems can be shined by single light. [It refers to the light (*obhāsa*) belongs to ten kinds of *upakkilesa* *dhamma* of *vipassanā*. (*Mūlat* *ī*-1-89)] Therefore, (in Pāl i Text of *Milinda* *pañha*) the most Venerable *Nāgasena* Thera explained as follows: — 

“Royal devotee the great king … a man brings an oil-light into the house with full of darkness; as the oil-light which had been brought destroys the darkness, causes to occur the light, shows the light obviously, makes the colour-object easy to see, similarly, if the wisdom would be occurred, … 

1. it is capable of destroying the darkness called ignorance (***avijjā***), 
1. it causes the light called wisdom (***vijjā***), 
1. it shows apparently the ray called knowledge, 
1. it makes the Noble Truths easy to be seen. 

Royal devotee the great king … thus the wisdom (*paññā*) has the characteristic shining in order to distinguish the real nature of object as oil-light”, said by the Venerable *Nāgasena* Thera. (*Abhi*-Com-1-165,166) 

Then in Sub-commentary of *Pacalāyamana* *Sutta*, *Sattaka* *Nipāta*, *Ańguttara* *Nikāya*, it was explained that there are four kinds of lights of wisdom. After the most Venerable *Moggallāna* had ordained, and strenuously endeavoured in order to fulfil the obligation of *bhikkhu* in the forest near *Kallavāl* *aputta* village, Magadha division, he sat down with sloth and torpor at the entrance of corridor, due to presence of fatigue by walking throughout seven days. At that time the Buddha came to there and preached on seven ways of rejecting sloth and torpor. Here it would be presented an excerpt relating to light, number 6, how to reject 

torpor (*middha*). 

**PAGE 512** 

**3.12.B. An excerpt of *Pacalāyamāna* *Sutta*** 

*no ce te evam*  *viharato tam*  *middham*  *pahīyetha*, *tato tvam*  *moggallāna ālokasaññam*  *manasi kareyyāsi*, *divāsaññam*  *adhit* *t* *haheyyāsi*, *yathā divā tathā rattim*  *yathā rattim*  *tathā divā*, *iti vivat* *ena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhāsam*  *cittam*  *bhāveyyāsi*. *t* *hānam*  *kho panetam*  *vijjati yam*  *te evam*  *viharato tam*  *middham*  *pahīyetha*. (*Ańg*-2-463) 

- *Bhikkhu* *Moggallāna* … unless the torpor can be avoided for you even by seeing directions with planets in this way, you must develop the perception of light (*āloka* *saññā*) due to inability to avoid torpor in that way. You must develop similarly for the night as day-time. You must develop similarly for the day as night-time. Thus the consciousness with the shining light which lacks any kind of circumstantial webs and torpor, must be developed. For you, by developing in this way, it is absolute certainty there will be avoiding the torpor. (*Ańg*- 2-463) 

**3.12.C. Perception of light (*āloka saññā*)** 

*ālokasaññanti middhavinodanaālokasaññam* . *divāsaññanti divātisaññam* . *yathā divā tathā rattinti yathā divā ālokasaññā adhit* *t* *hitā*, *tathā nam*  *rattampi adhit* *t* *haheyyāsi*. *yathā rattim*  *tathā divāti yathā ca te rattim*  *ālokasaññā adhit* *t* *hitā*, *tathā nam*  *divāpi* 

*adhit* *t* *haheyyāsi*. *sappabhāsanti dibbcakkhuñān* *atthāya sahobhāsam* .*  (*Ańg*-Com-3-174) 

*ālokasaññam*  *manasikareyyāsīti divā vā rattim*  *vā sūriya-pajjota-canda-man* *iādīnam*  *ālokam**  “*āloko*”*ti manasikareyyāsi*, *citte t* *hapeyyāsi*. *yathā te subhāvitālokakasin* *assa viya kasin* *āloko yadicchakam*  *yāvadicchakañca so āloko rattiyam*  *upatit* *t* *hati*, *yena tattha divāsaññam*  *t* *hapeyāsi*, *divā viya vigatathinamiddho bhaveyyāsīti*. *pa*. *sahobhāsanti* 

*sañān* *obhāsam* . *thinamiddhavinodanaālokopi vā hotu kasin* *ālokopi vā parikammālokopi vā*, *upakkilesāloko viya sabboyam*  *āloko ñān* *asamut* *t* *hānovāti*. (*Ańg*-*t* *ī*-3-177,178) 

The meaning of those commentary and sub-commentary is as follows: — 

The *meditator* who wants to attain super-psychic-knowledge, such as divine eye (*dibba* *cakkhu* *abhiññān* *a*), must fulfil eight absorptions for eight kinds of *kasin* *a*, from earth- *kasin* *a* to white-*kasin* *a*, previously. Those 8 kinds of absorptions on 8 kinds of *kasin* *a* must be thoroughly ground by means of fourteen modes (*cudda* *sākāra*) (see *Visuddhi*-2-2). After it had been ground thoroughly in that way, the *meditator* who wants to attain divine eye must practise in order to ready for such situation which is capable of leading to attain divine eye by means of thorough modes on the fourth absorption with the *kasin* *a* object which is the fundamental factor of that super-psychic-knowledge. After it had been practised in this way, any kind of *kasin* *a* among three kinds called fire-*kasin* *a*,  

**PAGE 513** 

white-*kasin* *a*, light-*kasin* *a*, must be extended in order to reach the field of neighbourhood concentration. In this case, it had been explained that … 

“*imesu ca pana tīsu āloka kasin* *am*  *yeva set* *t* *hataram* . (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

- “Among these three kinds of *kasin* *a*, only the light-*kasin* *a* is the supreme one in order to attain divine eye”. The *meditator* who wants to develop perception of light must take into heart as “***āloka*** (light)”, “***āloka*** (light)” etc. by taking the object of sunlight, moonlight, blazing fire, the shining light of ruby, etc. When circular shape of light occurs after changed from preliminary object of light at the beginning, it must be spread out those lights on ten directions of desired range with the result that the efficiency of light will become stronger gradually. When the efficiency of light becomes strong in that way — 

“***ettha āloko hotūti yattakam******    ***t*** ***h***    ***ānam******    ***p*** ***aricchindati, tattha āloko tit***  ***t*** ***h***     ***atiyeva***”. (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

- it must be perform strong determination as “many the light occurs within this range”, etc. Thus such range would be separated. Within that range, the light would be occurred really. (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

“***divasampi nisīdittvā passato rūpadassanam******    ***h***  ***oti***” (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

For the person with super-psychic-knowledge, who is observing throughout day, the seeing of colour-objects would be occurred really. (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

In *Pacalāyamāna* *Sutta* mentioned above, the Buddha instructed the most Venerable *Moggallāna* to develop and perform strong determination on the perception of light that is shining throughout day and night continuously. Then the Buddha continued to explain that if the perception of light would be taken into heart in that way, the sloth and torpor that are retardable factors to take the object of practice, will be removed consequently. That kind of light is called “*thinamiddha vinodana āloka*” = the light which is capable of removing sloth and torpor”, indeed. So as to relate that instruction, the sub-commentator of *Ańguttara* *nikāya* explained on four kinds of lights of wisdom (= lights of knowledge). 
**
` `*parikammālokopi vā*, *upakkilesāloko viya sabboyam*  *āloko ñān* *asamut* *t* *hānovāti*. (*Ańg*-*t* *ī*-3-178) 

It is explained that there are four kinds of lights of knowledge, viz, 

1) *thina* *middha* *vinodana* *āloka*, 
1) *kasin* *āloka*, 
1) *parikammāloka*, 
1) *upakkilesāloka*. 

**PAGE 514** 

“*upakkilesāloko viya sabboyam*  *āloko ñān* *a samut* *t* *hānova*”. (*Ańg*-*tī*-3-178) 

- “As the light called *upakkilesa*, which is the cause of defilement of *vipassanā* knowledge occurring in *udayavaya* stage is caused by *vipassanā* knowledge, those all kinds of lights mentioned above are caused by knowledge”, explained in sub-commentary, *Ańg*-*t* *ī*-3-178. 

**(3.12.C.i) *thina middha vinodana āloka*** 

“*iti vivat* *ena cetasā apariyonaddhena sappabhsam*  *cittam*  *bhāveyāsi*”. (*Ańg*-2-463) 

- It must be developed the mind with the shining light but lacking torpor and circumstantial webs anymore. (*Ańg*-2-463) 

Thus the Buddha instructed Venerable *Moggallāna* to develop the mind with the light (=*sappabhsam*  *cittam* ). Those words, “*sappabhsam*  *cittam* ”, is commented in commentary as follows: — 

“***sappabhsan**ti dibbacakkhu ñān* *atthāya sahobhāsam* ”. (*Ańg*-Com-3-174) 

- It must be developed the **mind with the shining light** in order to attain divine eye (*dibba* *cakkhu* *abhiññān* *a*). Therefore it should be recognized on the fact that in this *Pacalāyamāna* *Sutta*, “the light which is capable of removing sloth and torpor” = *thina* *middha* *vinodana* *āloka*, is a kind of light which is developed for the purpose of divine eye or it is a kind of light produced by the mind associating with the knowledge of divine eye. Further explanations can be found in Pāl i Text of *Vibhańga* and it’s commentary as follows: — *thinamiddham*  *pahāya vigatathinamiddho viharati ālokasaññī sato sampajāno*. (*Abhi*-

2-253) 

“*ālokasaññī*”*ti tattha katamā saññā*, *yā saññā sañjānanā sañjānitattam* , *ayam*  *vuccati saññā*. *ayam*  *saññā ālokā hoti vivat* *ā parisuddhā pariyodātā*, *tena vuccati* “*ālokasaññī*”*ti*. (*Abhi*-2-263,264) 

*ālokasaññīti rattimpi divāpi dit* *t* *hālokasañjānanasamatthāya vigatanīvaran* *āya parisuddhāya saññāya samannāgato*. (*Abhi*-Com-2-353) 

*ālokā hotīti sappabhā hoti*. *nirāvaran* *at* *t* *hena vivat* *ā*. *nirupakkilesat* *t* *hena parisuddhā*. *pabhassarat* *t* *hena pariyodātā*. (*Abhi*-Com-2-354) 

It must be taken into heart as “light, light (*āloka*)”, by seeing any kind of light, such as sunlight, moonlight, the shining light of ruby, blazing fire, etc. It must be taken into heart any kind of light which can be available in proper time and proper way. Developing shining light of light-*kasin* *a* would be well situated at night whenever and wherever he likes as well developed light-*kasin* *a*. At that time, that *meditator* must keep in mind that shining light as the perception of shining light  

**PAGE 515** 

occurring in daytime. The perception of light must be thoroughly developed throughout night time as well as sloth and torpor are avoiding in daytime. It means that the meaning of “*āloka* *saññī* = perception of light”, is the fact that — it would be fulfilled with circumstantial purified perception, which is capable of memorizing the sunlight occurred in daytime even though in night time, which is lacking hindrances of sloth and torpor totally. 

This perception has not only the shining light but also occurrence of lacking in any kind of hindrances called *nīvaran* *a* with the result that it is uncovered due to occurrence of ability to take into heart the object of light. Due to reaching into the field of neighbourhood concentration in this stage, those impurities called hindrances are removed totally and those defilements which have the same depended factors of hindrances are also far from him. Those impurities of defilements are unwholesome *dhamma* which are capable of making dirtiness of mind. Due to absence of impurities of defilements, the mind of meditation is circumstantially purified. Due to presence of brilliant shining light it is circumstantially clear. (*Abhi*-2-253,263,264; *Abhi*-Com-2-354) 

This preaching refers to “***thina* *middha* *vinodana* *āloka***”, which can be produced by mind of meditation at the field of neighbourhood concentration, before the full concentration of first absorption, in the continuum of *bhikkhu* who is practising light-*kasin* *a*. Therefore it should be recognized on the fact that those shining lights which are producing during the neighbourhood concentration of the first absorption that has the object of light-*kasin* *a*, are also designated as “***thina*** ***middha* *vinodana* *āloka*** =  **the light which is capable of removing** 

**sloth and torpor**. **(3.12.C.ii) *kasin***  ***ā***  ***loka*** 

The practice of light-*kasin* *a* (*āloka*-*kasin* *a*) which is the proximate cause of divine eye has also ability to produce light. It is a way of practice called *kasin* *a* at which the sign of light is taken as object and developed frequently. Then the shining light is present in all kinds of super-psychic-knowledge including divine eye and all remaining *kasin* *a*s, which are fundamental factors of *vipassanā* knowledge, respectively. When it would be reached into sign of full concentration, all circular objects of *kasin* *a* usually become brilliant bright. Especially, the fire-*kasin* *a*, white-*kasin* *a* and light-*kasin* *a* have greater efficiency in producing shining light actually. However, in this case, with regarding to the phrase, “*sabboyam*  *āloko ñān* *a samut* *t* *hānova* = all kinds of lights are produced by knowledge”, it should be recognized on the fact that those lights are also produced by knowledge associating with the absorption of *kasin* *a*. Then it can be appeared a question whether or not the light of *kasin* *a* is produced by knowledge. 

*kevalañhi samādhilābhino upat* *t* *hānākāramattam*  *saññajametam* . (*Visuddhi*-1-122) 

- This sign of full concentration of *kasin* *a* is a kind of sign which is produced by pure perception of practice (*bhāvanā* *saññā*) only, which is merely mode of appearance in the knowledge of *meditator* who attains the neighbourhood concentration. 

**PAGE 516** 

According to above explanations, due to presence of perception of practice, the sign of full concentration of *kasin* *a* occurs consequently and then the perception of practice can not be occurred as a single perception uniquely but associating with the knowledge simultaneously. It can be occurred only in the continuum of *meditator* who attains the neighbourhood or full concentration and then those concentration of neighbourhood and full absorptions and knowledge occur together with in the same mind moment. It should be recognized on the fact that it would be commented emphatically on the perception (*saññā*)”. Therefore it should be recognized on the fact that the shining light produced by taking the object of sign of full concentration of *kasin* *a*, is designated as “***kasin***  ***ā***  ***loka***”. 

**(3.12.C.iii) *parikammāloka*** 

There are two kinds of *parikammāloka*, viz, the *parikamma* which is the fundamental factor of super-psychic-knowledge and the *parikamma* which is the fundamental factor of absorption, respectively. 

*tattha* *ukkāloko* *viya parikammakāle kasin* *āloko*. (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

- In that example, by the time making preliminary object (*parikamma*) which is the fundamental factor of super-psychic-knowledge, should be recognized as “the blazing fire of grall”. 

Above explanation can be found in the Section of *Dibba* *cakkhu* *abhiññān* *a*. In this case, thorough grinding by fourteen modes on eight *kasin* *a* objects which are fundamental factor of divine eye, is also a kind of preliminary object (*parikamma*). Then the circular shape of light-*kasin* *a* or any other *kasin* *a*, is developed by spreading it out up to reach the field of neighbourhood concentration for the purpose of divine eye. It is also designated as preliminary object just before the impulsion of super-psychic-knowledge arises. During that moments of preliminary object, the light is present really. 

The next kind is the preliminary object which is fundamental factor of absorption. The practice is performed by taking the object of any circular shaped, such as earth-*kasin* *a*, light- *kasin* *a*, etc. The circular shape of natural earth or light through which a such kind of practice is developed as it’s object and then that kind of practice is designated as “*parikamma* *bhāvanā*” (= preliminary practice) and those signs of circular shapes are called ***parikamma* *nimitta*** (= **preliminary sign**). 

When that any kind of *kasin* *a* object is taken as object by shutting and opening the eye alternatively, for such time, that sign is kept in mind well. It appears obviously in the mind- door as well as it is seen by natural eye. That object seen obviously in the knowledge is designated as *uggaha* *nimitta* (= sign of preliminary concentration). Due to ability to take well on previous *parikamma* *nimitta* by mind, it is designated as ***uggaha* *nimitta***. That way of practice is called *parikamma* *bhāvanā* resulting in the occurrence of *parikamma* *samādhi* (= preliminary concentration) only. However, the preliminary concentration which takes the object of this *uggaha* *nimitta* is subtler and stronger than the preliminary concentration which takes the object of *parikamma* *nimitta*. 

When the *meditator* who has concentrated mind with preliminary concentration by 

taking the object  **PAGE 517** 

of *uggaha* *nimitta*, continues to fulfil the practice for one time a kind of sign, which is the same size and shape of that *uggaha* *nimitta* situates and firmly fixed in the mind. It appears obviously and it is more brilliant that *uggaha* *nimitta* about many hundreds times. It is designated as *pat* *ibhāga* *nimitta* (= sign of full concentration). The practice which is developed by taking the object of sign of full concentration is designated as *upacāra* *bhāvanā* (neighbourhood practice) and that kind of concentration is also designated as *upacāra* *samādhi* (= neighbourhood concentration). 

Before it is reached into the field of neighbourhood concentration, the shining light usually appears, due to the knowledge associating with preliminary concentration (*parikamma* *samādhi*) which is quite adjacent to neighbourhood absorption. Those kinds of lights are designated as *parikammāloka* (the light produced by preliminary concentration). It 

should be recognized on the fact that those preliminary concentration of remaining meditation subjects in *samatha* stage are also capable of producing lights similar to *kasin* *a*-object. It is absolutely certain the light will be produced in higher concentrations, neighbourhood and full absorptions with regarding to ***Nimitta* *Sutta*** that will be continued to present later. 

In the practice of mindfulness of breathing, there are also three kinds of signs, preliminary sign (*parikamma* *nimitta*), neighbourhood sign (*uggaha* *nimitta*) and sign of full concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*). Preliminary concentration (*parikamma* *samādhi*) that is taking the object of neighbourhood sign and those concentrations which are taking the objects of sign of full concentration, can produce the shining light really. 

In the *Mahāt* *īkā* it is explained that by the time the preliminary and neighbourhood concentrations are occurring before the full absorptions of various meditation subjects, are also designated as “***parikamma***”. 

**Explanation of *Mahāt***  ***ī*** ***k***  ***ā*** 

*ito pubbe parikammānanti nānāvajjanavīthiyam*  *parikammaānam* . (*Mahat* *ī*-1-161) 

One kind of consciousness of impulsion of neighbourhood concentration of sensuous sphere, which is adaptable to occur the impulsion of full absorption called “***mahaggata***”, is designated as ***parikamma***. This explanation refers to impulsion of neighbourhood concentration of sensuous sphere, which is known as *parikamma* that belongs to cognitive process of full absorption. 

However the real meaning of above quotation found in *Mahāt* *īkā* is as follows. — 

*ito pubbe parikammānam*  *upari appanāyaca anulomato anulomānītipi vuccanti*. (*Visuddhi*-1-134) 

- Those impulsions of neighbourhood concentration of sensuous sphere, which belongs to cognitive process of full absorption, which is known as “*anuloma*”, carries out not only the function of preceding ‘*parikamma*’, but also to occur succeeding full absorption. Due to adaptability of both preceding *parikamma* and succeeding full absorption, those impulsions of sensuous sphere are designated as ***anuloma*** (= successive). (*Visuddhi*-1-134) 

**PAGE 518** 

With relating to the phrase, “***ito pubbe parikammānam****  = **preceding ‘*parikamma*’** of cognitive process of full absorption”, the sub-commentator (*Mahāt* *īkā* Sayadaw) explained that the preceding *parikamma* does not mean on an impulsion called *parikamma* which belongs to cognitive process of full absorption. All impulsions belongs to preceding cognitive processes with various advertences, before the cognitive process of full absorption occurs, are known as *parikamma* due to ability to provide the occurrence of impulsions of full absorption, explained by *Mahāt* *īkā* Sayadaw. 

According to explanation of *Mahāt* *īkā*, it should be recognized the fact that all impulsions which had been occurred in preceding cognitive processes before the cognitive process of full absorption occurs, are known as “***parikamma***”. 

Preceding cognitive process before cognitive process of full absorption arises, are those cognitive processes occurring in the fields of *parikamma* *samādhi* and *upacāra* *samādhi*. Due to presence of powerful supporting factor of those cognitive processes, cognitive process of full absorption would be occurred. 

In this case, those cognitive processes with various advertences means numerous cognitive processes which had been occurred before cognitive process of full absorption arises. Those cognitive processes which are taking the object of sign of practice (*samatha* *nimitta*), such as, object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing etc, are 

mind–door cognitive processes. Each cognitive process consists of specific kind of advertence as natural fixed law. With regarding to the words, “cognitive processes with various advertences”, it means not single process but numerous cognitive processes which are designated as “*parikamma*”. It should be recognized on the fact that the shining light produced by the knowledge which is associating with those impulsions called *parikamma* is called “***parikammāloka***”. 

**(3.12.C.iv) *upakkilesāloka*** 

There is a kind of light called ***obhāsa*** which will be presented in the section of *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a*. It is also known as ***upakkilesāloka***. (It will be explained in detail in Section nine, Volume V.) 

With regarding to explanation found in *Ańguttara*-*t* *īkā*-3-178, “all kinds of lights are produced by knowledge as the light of *upakkilesa*, that is impurity of *vipassanā* knowledge”, if one can accept the presence of light of *upakkilesa*, it must be accepted the fact that remaining three kinds of lights are also obviously present, due to ability to occur by knowledge only. 

**What is the light of knowledge?** 

There is a reasonable question that whether the light is present in mental *dhamma* or not and what is the light of wisdom or the light of knowledge? The answer can be found in the section of *upakkilesa*, *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* stage, *Visuddhimagga*, *Mahāt* *īkā*, Volume 2. It was explained on those shining lights produced by the knowledge of arising and passing away (*udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a*). It should be  

**PAGE 519** 

recognized on the remaining lights in similar way. 

*vipassanobhāsoti vipassanācittasamut* *t* *hitam* , *sasantatipatitam*  *utusamut* *t* *hānañca bhāsuram*  *rūpam* . *tattha vipassanācittasamut* *t* *hitam*  *yogino sarīrat* *t* *hameva pabhassaram*  *hutvā tit* *t* *hati*, *itaram*  *sarīram*  *muñcitvā ñān* *ānubhāvānurūpam*  *samantato pattharatti*, *tam*  *tasseva paññāyati*, *tena phut* *t* *hokāse rūpagatampi passati*. *passantoca cakkhuviññān* *ena passati*, *udāhu manoviññān* *enāti vīmams* *itabbanti vadanti*, *dibbacakkhulābhino viya tam*  *manoviññān* *aviññeyyamevāti yuttam*  *viya dissati*. (*Mahat* *ī*-2-428,429) 

The meaning of above quotation of *Mahāt* *īkā* is as follows. — 

***vipassanobhāsa*** (= **the light of *vipassanā* knowledge**) is the shining lights of colour object (***rūpāramman*** ***a***   ) which are consisting in pure-octads produced by mind of meditation (*cittaja* *ojat* *t* *hamaka* *rūpa*) and pure-octads produced by temperature (*utuja* *ojat* *t* *hamaka* *rūpa*). It will be clear understood. — Every mind moment depending on physical base (*hadaya* *vatthu*) within the heart can produce numerous corporeal units called *cittaja* 

*ojat* *t* *hamaka* *rūpa* with the nutriment (*ojā*) as eight factor. Those corporealities are incapable of occurring uniquely but a group called corporeal units (*rūpa* *kalāpa*). Unit or *kalāpa* is the smallest system of corporeal *dhamma* in the aspect of *Abhidhamma* (Noble philosophical doctrine) of the Buddha. It is about or smaller than the size of “*paramā* minute sub-particles” called “*paramānumyū*”. If each corporeal unit is analysed by knowledge in the aspect of ultimate reality, it consists of at least eight kinds of nature of corporealities, *pathavī*, *āpo*, *tejo*, *vāyo*, *van* *n* *a*, *gandha*, *rasa*, *ojā*, etc. Due to presence of *ojā* (nutriment) as eighth factor, it is designated as *ojat* *t* *hamaka* *rūpa*. It is caused by mind and then it is called *cittaja rūpa*. (Sometimes, if the sound (*sadda*) is also present, the corporeal unit consists of nine kinds of nature of corporealities. In this stage, it is explained emphatically on those corporealities produced by mind of *samatha* practice or *vipassanā* practice with the result that sound is omitted to explain.) 

Among those eight kinds of nature of corporealities, the colour-object called *van* *n* *a*, if it is produced by mind of meditation (*samatha*) of *vipassanā*, is brilliant shining colour (***bhāsura* *rūpa***). 

[**Notes**: Those concepts, “the birth consciousness can not produce corporeality” and “the death-consciousness of arahant can not produce corporeality”, are accepted by all commentators. However the concept that “whether remaining kinds of death-consciousness can produce corporeality or not”, is controversial in scriptures.] 

That **brilliant shining colour** (***bhāsurarūpa*)** is present in every corporeal units produced by mind and the more those corporeal units in number, the brighter in shining colour of those corporeal units.  

**PAGE 520** 

The brightness of colour object, therefore, depends on efficiency of the knowledge. 

Those mental *dhamma* which are associating with the consciousness of (*samatha*) *vipassanā* practice are generally, 34 mind and mental concomitants. [Those are 34 in the first absorption, while 32 in the second absorption, 31 in the third absorption, 31 in the fourth absorption, respectively. The mental concomitant called compassion (***karunā***    ), would be included in the absorption of compassion, while the sympathetic joy (***muditā***) would be included in the absorption of *muditā*. It can be seen in Section 5, *Nāma* *kammat* *t* *hāna*.] Among those mental *dhamma* the mental concomitant, knowledge (= wisdom) called ***paññindare*** is also included. It means that the brightness of colour object depends on efficiency of that knowledge. 

[**Notes**: The efficiency of knowledge also depends on both present factors and fulfilled perfections (*pāramita*) in previous lives, such as, (1) ***sappurisūpanissaya*** = associating with noble persons, the Buddha, etc., (2) ***saddhammassavana*** = listening to *dhamma* preached by noble persons, (3) ***yonisomanasikāra*** = wise attention, (4) ***dhammānudhamma* *pat***  ***i*** ***p***  ***atti*** = respectfully fulfilling those practices which are adaptable to nine kind of Supra-mundane *dhamma*, etc.] 

Then each corporeal unit produced by mind consists of temperature (*tejo*) that is called “*utu*”. That temperature (*utu*) can give rise to new corporeal unit with the nutriment as eight factor. Depending on efficiency of knowledge of practice, each temperature or fire- element within corporeal unit produced by mind, is capable of producing many generations of corporeal units called *utuja* *ojat* *t* *hamaka* *kalāpa* successively. The colour objects (*rūpāramman* *a*) within those corporeal units are also brilliant shining (*bhāsura rūpa*) of which the brightness depends on efficiency of knowledge. Those corporeal units produced by temperature (*utuja* *rūpa*) are designated as ***sasantatipatita* *utusamut***  ***t*** ***h***     ***āna*** = corporealities produced by temperature, which fall in the continuum of oneself. 

[**Notes**: With regarding to the phrase, “***sasantatipatita* *utusamutt***     ***h***   ***āna***” = “corporealities produced by temperature, which fall in the continuum of oneself”, it should not be assumed on the fact that those corporealities produced by temperature of remaining three kinds, i.e., *kammaja* *tejo* = temperature within corporeal unit produced by *kamma*, *āhāraja* *tejo* = temperature within corporeal unit produced by nutriment, *utuja* *tejo* = temperature within corporeal unit produced by temperature, are also included. In this case, it should be recognized the fact that it refers to only those corporealities produced by mind which is associating with knowledge of (*samatha*) *vipassanā* practice. However, for instance, as if a house is burned, surrounding houses adjacent to burning one are also burned readily, similarly, when colour objects of corporeal units produced by mind are brilliant shining, those colour-objects of remaining corporeal units produced by *kamma*, nutriment,  

**PAGE 521** 

temperature, which are adjacent to the former, also become brilliant shine consequently. Due to quite close to each other, the light produced by various corporeal units usually occur continuously as shining rays. Therefore, it should be recognized on the fact that the phrase, “*sasantatipatita* *utusamut* *t* *hāna*”, is explained in order to know the fact that it is now the light of corporealities produced by temperature, which fall in the continuum of “external (*bahiddha*)”.] 

Among those two kinds of corporeal units produced by mind and temperature, the shining lights of colour-objects consisting in corporeal units produced by mind of meditation, situates inside the body only, while those lights of colour-object consisting in corporeal units produced by temperature spreads out both internally and externally up to ten directions of considerable range depending upon efficiency of the knowledge. Those shining lights are obvious in the knowledge of that *meditator* only. (It means that it is not obvious for surrounding persons.) 

That *meditator* can see various kinds of colour-objects situating in all directions, which are contact with those shining lights. In this case, noble teachers suggested that it should be scrutinized whether it would be seen by seeing-consciousness or not, but by mind- consciousness (*mano viññān* *a*) only. According to the assumption of *Mahāt* *īkā* Sayadaw, as those noble person with divine eye can see those colour-objects by mind-consciousness called super-psychic-knowledge of divine eye (*dibba* *cakkhu* *abhiññān* *a*), similarly, it would be reasonable the fact that those various kinds of colour-objects would be seen by mind- consciousness (of *samatha* and *vipassanā* practice). [These are the meaning of above quotations found in *Mahāt* *īkā*.] 

**The proximate cause** 

In this case, the proximate cause of greater or lesser efficiency of knowledge is the concentration (*samādhi*) because the Buddha preached in *Ańguttara* *Nikāya*-3-259, on the fact that “*samāhito* *yathābhūtam*  *jānāti* *passati*” = “the person with sufficient concentration knows and sees (*dhamma*) as they really are”. Therefore if one desires to attain the brighter light of knowledge, he must develop the higher concentration accordingly. Those kinds of taking into heart on sign of practice (***samatha* *nimitta***), such as object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing is a kind of wise attention (***yoniso manasīkāra***), indeed. 

**It is metaphorical usage** 

According to above explanations of *Mahāt* *īkā* Sayadaw, it should be recognized on the fact that the term, “**light of knowledge**”, is a kind of metaphorical usage only. It should be recognized that it is “***phalūpacāra***” usage in which the term, “light of *vipassanā* knowledge” (*samatha* knowledge), is  

**PAGE 522** 

applied metaphorically on causative knowledge by which the resultant corporeal units produced by that knowledge and successive generations of corporeal units produced by temperature, can produce shining lights from their colour-objects. In brief, it should be recognized on the fact that there is no light in the knowledge but in corporeal *dhamma* produced by that knowledge only. 

**3.12.D. It can be seen on various kinds of colour objects** 

With regarding to above quotation of *Mahāt* *īkā*, “***tena phut*** ***t***  ***h***     ***okāse rūpagatamp***    ***i passati***”, it means that the *meditator* can see various kinds of colour-objects situating in all directions, which are contact with those shining lights”, and the efficiency of that light is also explained in the commentary as follows: — 

*so kho panāyam*  *obhāso kassaci bhikkhuno pallańkat* *t* *hānamattameva obhāsento uppajjati*. *kassaci antogabbham* . *kassaci bahigabbhampi*. *kassaci sakalavihāram* , *gāvutam* , *ad* *d* *hayojanam* , *yojanam* , *dviyojanam* , *tiyojanam* . *pa*. *kassaci pathavīpalato yāva* 

*akanit* *t* *habrahmalokā ekālokam*  *kurumāno*. *bhagavato pana dasasahassilokadhātum*  *obhāsento udapādi*. (*Visuddhi*-2-270) 

- The range of that light occurs at only the surrounding of sitting place for some *bhikkhu*s, while inside the room for some *bhikkhu*s, and up to outside the room for some *bhikkhu*s. It occurs around the whole monastery, about three miles (*gāvuta*), about six miles (*at* *d* *a yojana*), about 12 miles (*yojana*), about 24 miles (*dvi yojana*), about 36 miles (*ti* *yojana*), and from the earth to the highest world of fine material plane (*a-kanit* *t* *ha brahma loka*), in various ranges for various meditating *bhikkhu*s respectively. Those shining lights of the Buddha, indeed, would be occurred obviously all around ten thousands solar systems. (*Visuddhi*-2-

\270) 

Relating to various ranges of those shining lights in various *meditators* had been explained by two examples in the *Visuddhimagga* as follows: — 

Two meditating old *Mahā* Theras were staying inside one building with two spires, at Cittala Mountain, very famous monastery in Sri Lanka. The night when two old *Mahā* Theras discussed the *dhamma* relating with efficiency of light was one of moonless nights of *uposatha* days with total darkness due to coverings of clouds in eight directions. 

By the time four kinds of factors, 

1) midnight of moonless day, 
1) inside the Cittala mountain forest monastery which situated in dense forest, 
1) it was covered with heavy clouds throughout all directions, 
1) lacking in any light, lightening etc., 

**PAGE 523** 

were completed resulting in dense darkness was full of in that room. At that time, the younger *Mahā* Thera asked that — 

*bhante mayham*  *idāni cetiyańgan* *amhi sīhāsane pañcavan* *n* *āni kusumāni paññāyanti*. (*Visuddhi*-2-270) 

- “*Bhante* … now it is obviously appeared in the knowledge of me that those flowers with five kinds of colours are present on the noble stage called ‘*sīhāsana*’ in the square of pagoda”. 

*sāyane tattha santharitāni pañcavan* *n* *āni kusumāni*, *visadañān* *assa obhāsena* 

*pharitat* *t* *hāne rūpagatañca dibbacakkhuno viya paññāyanti*. (*Mahat* *ī*-2-429) 

The building where *Mahā* Theras usually stay, consists of bedrooms surrounded by corridors and covered by double walls. Those shining lights produced by *vipassanā* knowledge of younger *Mahā* Thera penetrated both two walls and reached up to the square of pagoda. At the time of marvellous sunset, those flowers with five different colours were offered on the noble stage called *sīhāsana* in the square of pagoda with regarding to the incomparable supreme noble qualities of the Buddha. For the *meditator* with clear *vipassanā* knowledge, various kinds of colour-objects which are situating a such place within the range of shining lights of knowledge contact as the noble person with divine eye. Therefore, the younger *Mahā* Thera asked that “*bhante* … now it is obviously appeared in the knowledge of me that those flowers with five kinds of colours are present on the noble stage called *sīhāsana* in the square of the pagoda”. (*Mahat* *ī*-2-429) 

The elder *Mahā* Thera replied to younger one that — 

“*anacchariyam*  *āvuso kathesi*, *mayham*  *panetarahi mahāsamuddamhi yojanat* *t* *hāne macchakacchapā paññāyanti*” (*Visuddhi*-2-270) 

- “*Āvuso* … you have say so a little bit wonder at all! Now those fishes and turtles are obviously appeared within one *yojana* (about 12 miles) range of the great ocean”. (*Visuddhi*- 2-270) 

Here the *meditator* should not neglect the fact that the *meditator* can see both those flowers with five kinds of colours and fishes and turtles, which are situated in such place within the range of shining lights contact. Then it should be accepted the fact that one *meditator* can see various kinds of colour-objects by those shining lights produced by remaining consciousnesses of *samatha* practice, such as *kasin* *āloka*, *parikammāloka*, similar to those shining lights produced by *vipassanā* knowledge and super-psychic-knowledge (*abhiññān* *a*). This is because of the fact that although efficiency of lights may be varied depending on knowledge, all those lights have the same root, the knowledge only.  

**PAGE 524** 

Unless above explanations are well accepted, it should be continued to read about the fundamental basis of divine eye, *kasin* *āloka* and *parikammāloka* as follows: — 

**3.12.E. *kasin***  ***ā***  ***loka*-*parikammāloka*** 

*imesu ca pana tīsu ālokakasin* *amy* *eva set* *t* *hataram* . *tasmā tam*  *vā itaresam*  *vā aññataram*  *kasin* *aniddese vuttanayena uppādetvā upacārabhūmiyamy* *eva t* *hatvā* 

*vad* *d* *hetabbam* . *pa*. *vad* *d* *hutit* *t* *hānassa antoyeva rūpagatam*  *passitabbam* . *rūpagatam*  *passato panassa parikammassa vāro atikkamati*. *tato āloko antaradhāyati*. *tasmim*  *antarahite rūpagatampi na dissati*. *athānena punappunam*  *pādakajjhānameva pavisitvā tato vut* *t* *hāya āloko pharitabbo*. *evam*  *anukkamena āloko thāmagato hoti*. (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

The meaning of above Pāl i Quotation is as follows: — 

The *meditator* who wants to see the world by divine eye must fulfil thorough grinding of the mind by means of fourteen modes on eight *kasin* *a*-objects, from the earth-*kasin* *a* to whit-*kasin* *a* through which eight kinds of absorptions, from the first absorption to the absorption of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, would be performed properly and fulfilling eight kinds of noble qualities of the fourth absorption and then it should be performed the occurrence of proximate cause of divine eye through any one of three *kasin* *a*- objects, i.e., the fire-*kasin* *a*, white-*kasin* *a* and light-*kasin* *a*. Then the circular shape of *kasin* *a*- object should be extended by making as the object of neighbourhood absorption but not that of full concentration. Unless it is extended up to the field of neighbourhood concentration, the impulsion of super-psychic-knowledge of divine eye can not be occurred in the continuum of *meditator*. If it is extended on the circular shape of *kasin* *a*-object up to the field of full absorption, the object of *kasin* *a*, which has dependence as fundamental basis of absorption (***pādakajjhāna***) only, can be occurred, but not super-psychic-knowledge which depends on that fundamental basis of absorption. That kind of *parikamma* (preliminary sign), which had been performed up to the field of neighbourhood concentration only has the efficiency to 

occur impulsion of super-psychic-knowledge actually. [These explanations refers to only those persons with eight kinds of absorptions for ten kinds of *kasin* *a*, who can thoroughly grind on those absorptions by fourteen modes.] 

Among those three kinds of *kasin* *a* objects, only the light-*kasin* *a* is the supreme one for the purpose of attainment of divine eye. Therefore, any one of those three *kasin* *a*-objects, the light-*kasin* *a* or the fire-*kasin* *a* or the white-*kasin* *a*, must be extended up to the field of neighbourhood concentration. 

The *meditator* should observe all kinds of colour-objects within the range of shining lights extended and contact with. For the *bhikkhu* who observes various colour-objects which are presenting outside  

**PAGE 525** 

the range of shining lights, the process (*vāra*) has reached beyond *parikamma*. (In this case, *parikamma* means neighbourhood concentration by taking the object of light-*kasin* *a* which is extended to such range. If the light-*kasin* *a*-object is given up to observe but various colour objects which are presenting outside the range of light-*kasin* *a*, are observer one-sidedly, the concentration falls back and it can be said that the process has reached beyond *parikamma*. Due to occurrence of decreased concentration, the shining lights disappear and various colour-objects can not be seen. (Due to presence of efficiency of *kasin* *āloka*, various colour- objects can be seen in knowledge. Then the lights of *kasin* *a* (*kasin* *āloka*), in turn, is also produced by efficiency of *parikamma* called the practice which is fulfilled in order to reach the field of neighbourhood concentration. Therefore unless *parikamma* is well performed both two processes called lights of *kasin* *a* and seeing on various colour-objects will be doomed to failure.) At that time, that *meditator* must enter the neighbourhood concentration of absorption which is the fundamental basis of divine eye frequently and after emerged from it and then the range of shining lights must be extended again. It must be performed frequently on the process of entering and spreading the lights alternatively. If the *meditator* fulfils continuously in this way, the range of shining lights become larger and stable for long 

time. At that time — 

such range of a place would be separated and strongly determined that “**may shining lights be occurred within this range**”. At that range of a place, the shining lights occurs continuously. The *meditator* can see various kinds of colour-objects throughout day really. (*Visuddhi*-2-58; *Mahat* *ī*-2-61,62) 

These explanations are very reliable evidence found in scriptures relating to the fact that various kinds of colour-objects can be seen by shining lights called *kasin* *āloka*, *parikammāloka*. 

**3.12.F. The reason of noble teachers who have no desire to accept shining lights** 

Some noble teachers have no desire to accept the fact relating to shining lights which are associating with either minds of meditation of *samatha* and *vipassanā* or wisdom associating with those minds of meditation. The reason why they can not accept is that they rely on the following explanation found in commentary. 

*kim*  *pana cittassa van* *n* *o nāma atthīti*? *natthi*. (*Ańg*-Com-1-45) 

- Has the mind colour called *van* *n* *a*? No. (*Ańg*-Com-1-45) 

**PAGE 526** 

With regarding to this explanation found in commentary, they have no desire to accept the presence of shining lights in mind of meditation of both *samatha* and *vipassanā*. However, above commentary explained with intended to show the fact that the mind is mental *dhamma* while the colour (*van* *n* *a*) is corporeal *dhamma*, resulting in lacking the colour in mind indeed. In this paper, it is not intended to say the mind has shining light but the latter can be called light of *samatha*, light of *vipassanā*, light of knowledge, resulting from the brightness of colour of corporeal units produced by mind of meditation and that of colour of corporeal units produced by temperature, as mentioned above. If the *meditator* has no desire to accept the brightness of colour of those corporeal units produced by mind and temperature, it should be continued to read the following *Sutta* preached by the Buddha himself. 

**3.12.G. *Adhicitta* *Sutta* (*nimitta* *sutta*)** 

*adhicittamanuyuttena bhikkhave bhikkhunā tīn* *i nimittāni kālena kālam*  *manasi kātabbāni*. *kālena kālam*  *samādhinimittam*  *manasi kātabbam* , *kālena kālam*  *paggahanimittam*  *manasi kātabbam* , *kālena kālam*  *upekkhānimittam*  *manasi kātabbam* . *sace bhikkhave adhicittamanuyutto bhikkhu ekantam*  *samādhinimittamy* *eva manasi kareyya*. *t* *hānam*  *tam*  *cittam*  *kosajjāya sam* *vatteyya*. *sace bhikkhave adhicittamanuyutto bhikkhu ekantam*  *paggahanimittamy* *eva manasi kareyya*. *t* *hānam*  *tam*  *cittam*  *uddhaccāya sam* *vatteyya*. *sace bhikkhave adhicittamanuyutto bhikkhu ekantam*  *upekkhānimittamy* *eva manasi kareyya*. 

*t* *hānam*  *tam*  *cittam*  *na sammā samādhiyeyya āsavānam*  *khayāya*. *yato ca kho bhikkhave adhicittamanuyutto bhikkhu kālena kālam*  *samādhinimittam*  *manasi karoti*, *kālena kālam*  *paggahanimittam*  *manasi karoti*, *kālena kālam*  *upekkhānimittam*  *manasi karoti*. *tam*  *hoti cittam*  *muduñca kammaniyañca pabhassarañca*, *na ca pabhańgu*, *sammā samādhiyati āsavānam*  *khayāya*. (*Ańg*-1-258) 

**(3.12.G.i) Complete translation of above *Sutta* can be seen in coming section 4 page 595,** 

***rūpa* *kammat***  ***t***   ***h***   ***āna*.** 

**PAGE 527** 

**(3.12.G.ii) The meaning of *adhicitta*** 

*adhicittanti* *samatha* *vipassanā* *cittam*  (*Ańg*-Com-2-227) 

*ekādasamepi* *adhi* *cittam*  *samatha* *vipassanā* *cittameva* (*Ańg*-Com-2-228) *dasakusalakammapathavasena uppannam*  *cittam*  *cittameva*. 

*vipassanāpādakaat* *t* *hasamāpatticittam*  *vipassanācittañca tato cittato adhikam*  *cittanti adhicittanti āha* “*adhicittanti samathavipassanā citta*”*nti*. *anuyuttassāti anuppannassa uppādanavasena uppannassa pat* *ibrūhanavasena anu anu yuttassa*, *tattha yuttappayuttassāti attho*. *ettha ca purebhattam*  *pin* *d* *āya caritvā pacchābhattam*  *pin* *d* *apātapat* *ikkanto nisīdanam*  *ādāya* “*asukasmim*  *rukkhamūle vā vanasan* *d* *e vā pabbhāre vā saman* *adhammam*  *karissāmī*”*ti nikkhamantopi tattha gantvā hatthehi vā pādehi vā nisajjat* *t* *hānato tin* *apan* *n* *āni apanentopi adhicittam*  *anuyuttoyeva*. *nisīditvā pana hatthapāde dhovitvā mūlakammat* *t* *hānam*  *gahetvā bhāvanam*  *anuyuñcanto bhāvanāya appanam*  *appattāyapi adhicittamanuyuttoyeva tadatthenapi tams* *addavohārato*.* (*Ańg*-*t* *ī*-2-198,199) 

**PAGE 528** 

- The wholesome consciousness which is occurred by fulfilling ordinary wholesome deeds, such as donation (*dāna*), virtue (*sīla*) of worldlings, is designated as consciousness (*citta*). Due to superior occurrence of those consciousnesses compared with that consciousness associating with ten kinds of wholesome deeds (*dasa* *kusala* *kammapatha*), both the consciousness of absorption called eight kinds of absorptions, which are fundamental basis of *vipassanā* practice and the consciousness of *vipassanā* practice are designated as the supreme consciousness (*adhicitta*). 

***anuyutta***: — Repeated endeavouring in order to occur minds of meditation of *samatha* and *vipassanā* by means of both occurrence of inexperienced ones and improvement of experienced ones, is called “*anuyutta*”. 

The *bhikkhu* who fulfils strenuously for those minds of meditation can be designated as “***anuyutta* *bhikkhu***”. After came back from alms round and took the lunch, both the *bhikkhu* who brings witting cloth and leaves with intention that “it will be practised on *bhikkhu*’s obligation in any of the base of tree or in the forest or in the gully”, and the *bhikkhu* who removes dry grass and leaves around sitting place can be designated as the person who fulfil mind of meditation of *samatha* and *vipassanā* called “***adhicitta***”. Although the full absorption has not been attained, the *bhikkhu* who repeatedly tries to develop the fundamental practice after hands and legs were cleaned out, can also be designated as the person who fulfil mind of meditation of *samatha* and *vipassanā* called “*adhicitta*”. Due to attainment of that degree of improvement, that *bhikkhu* can be designated as “*adhicitta* *manuyutta* *bhikkhu*”, indeed. (*Ańg*-*t* *ī*-2-198,199) 

**3.12.H. *pabhassara*-*pariyodāta*** 

The word, “***pariyodāte***”, which is one of eight noble qualities of the fourth absorption, is explicit in *Visuddhimagga* as follows: — 

“*parisuddhattāyeva* ***pariyodāte***, *pabhassareti* *vuttam*  *hoti*”. (*Visuddhi*-2-5) 

*iti* = In this way, 

*hoti* = it would be, 

*vuttam*  = interpreted that, 

*parisuddhattāyeva* = due to occurrence of merely circumstantial purification, 

*pariyodāte* = when it had been circumstantially purified, 

*pabhassare* = when it has brilliant shining. 

Above translation is achieved in accordance with Pyi Sayadaw. With regarding to this explanation, it should be recognized that *pariyodāta* and *pabhassara* are synonyms. Therefore it can be firmly  

**PAGE 529** 

decided that the Supreme Enlightened Buddha preached the fact those consciousnesses of practices of both *samatha* and *vipassanā*, called *adhicitta*, have brilliant shining lights (*pabhassara*) in this *Adhicitta* *Sutta* called *Nimitta* *Sutta*. In this case, it should be recognized that it is also “***phalūpacāra***” usage explained in previous page (521). 

Those significant reasons “why long explanations whether those consciousnesses of both *samatha* and *vipassanā* have shining lights or not, are presented” in this paper are that — 

*tasamim*  *antarahite* *rūpagatampi* *na* *dissati*. (*Visuddhi*-2-58) 

- It should be noticed emphatically on the explanation of commentary that — “when that shining lights disappear various colour-objects can not be seen”. That word plays significant role in attainment of *nāma* *rūpa* *pariccheda* *ñān* *a*, *paccaya* *pariggaha* *ñān* *a* and *vipassanā* *ñān* *a*, indeed. It will be clear understood — 

All corporeal *dhamma* always occur as corporeal unit under the natural fixed law. Corporeal unit, in turn, is the smallest system in the aspect of conventional reality (***vohāra* *sacca***). Each corporeal unit consists of at least eight kinds of nature of corporealities in the aspect of ultimate reality (***paramattha* *sacca***), viz, *pathavī* (the earth-element), *āpo* (water- element), *tejo* (fire-element), *vāyo* (air-element), *van* *n* *a* (colour), *gandha* (smell), *rasa* (taste) and *ojā* (nutriment). If *jīvita* (life-faculty) is included, there are nine kinds of nature in some corporeal units, while if clear-sensitivity or sex-corporeality is included, there are ten kinds of nature of corporealities. Thus, corporealities always occur as a group, corporeal unit (*rūpa* *kalāpa*), under natural fixed law. 

The *meditator* can see those colour-objects of corporeal units or those corporeal units with colour-objects due to mind of meditation of *samatha* and *vipassanā*. When those shining lights disappear he can see neither those colour-objects nor those corporeal units with colour- objects consequently. Then it is unable to discern those ultimate natures of corporealities within corporeal unit actually, resulting in failure to know and see the ultimate essence of corporeal *dhamma*. Unless the field of ultimate sense is penetratively reached, the compactness (*ghana*) of corporeality can not be broken down and the knowledge of non-self (*anatta* *ñān* *a*) can not be occurred. Unless the knowledge of non-self would be appeared, it can not be reached to the Noble Path-Knowledge resulting in failure to face with *nibbāna* 

consequently. 

Then unless those corporeal *dhamma* called un-derived (*bhūta* *rūpa*) and derived corporealities (*upādā* *rūpa*) are penetratively known and seen up to the field of ultimate reality, those mental *dhamma* which are occurring depending upon those corporeal *dhamma*, can not be known and seen. This is because of the fact that only when depended corporeality and object or specific door and specific object can be discerned simultaneously, can the *meditator* know the mental *dhamma* of sensuous sphere as they really are. (With regarding to the explanation, *vattāramman* *ānam*   

**PAGE 530** 

*pariggahitatāya*, *M*-Com—3-60. It will be seen in detailed in Section V, Volume 2, *nāma* *kammat* *t* *hāna*.) 

When those mental *dhamma* of sensuous sphere are kept in mind, five clear- sensitivities of corporeal *dhamma*, viz., eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and clear-sensitivity of mental *dhamma* called *bhavańga* mind-clearness, play essential important role in the way of practice. Unless those six sense-doors called six clear-sensitivities-elements are known and seen as they really are, those mental *dhamma* which are occurring depending upon six-sense- doors will not be discerned anymore. Actually those six-clear-sensitivities are only the *dhamma* which can be known and seen by the help of efficiency of shining lights produced by mind of meditation of *samatha* and *vipassanā*. 

Unless even corporeal and mental *dhamma* are distinguished by penetrative knowledge, it can not be attained *nāmarūpapariccheda ñān* *a.* In the continuum of *meditator* who has not attained that knowledge yet, the successive knowledge, *paccaya* *pariggaha* *ñān* *a* (distinguishing on causal relationship) is very far from him resulting in lacking in the occurrence of true *vipassanā* knowledge indeed. This is because of the fact that only when those ultimate natures of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* had been discerned by three general characteristics, can the *vipassanā* knowledge be occurred successively. 

*aniccādivasena* *vividhehi* *ākārehi* *dhamme* *passatīti* ***vipassanā***. (*Abhi*-Com-1-175) *pubbe* *kho* *susima* *dhammat* *hitiñānam* , *pacchā* *nibbāna* *ñānam* . (*Sam* -1-344) 

- *Susima* … the *vipassanā* knowledge called *dhammat* *hiti* which situated well on the process of impermanence, suffering, non-self of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, occurs previously. The Noble Path-Knowledge which takes the object of *nibbāna* occurs succeedingly. (*Sam* -1-344) Because the Buddha preached in this way, the Noble Path-Knowledge can be 

occurred by successive supporting conditions, such as, *upanissaya* (dependence condition) of *vipassanā* knowledge, actually. The most Supreme Eternal Peace called *nibbāna*, therefore, is the *dhamma* which is not deserving to expect for those persons who lacks any kind of *vipassanā* knowledge which takes the object of ultimate essence of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* in his continuum. 

As a traveller who travels in dense darkness at night requires only light to reach desired place,  

**PAGE 531** 

similarly, a person who is shrouded by dense darkness of ignorance (*avijjā*), requires shining lights, which is capable of showing Four Noble Truths as they really are, in order to reach *nibbāna*. That shining light means the light of wisdom or knowledge as mentioned above frequently. 

It should be understood the reason why the light of knowledge is essential but it is not to be attached strongly on those lights actually. 

It would be presented about the light in detail with regarding to the Buddha’s encouragement in various *Sutta*s, such as *Mahāassapura* *Sutta* etc., that the meditating *bhikkhu* who wants to know and see Fore Noble Truths must fulfil the fourth absorption with eight noble qualities. Among those eight noble qualities, one factor, “when it is brilliant shining (***pariyodāte***)”, is also included as a crucial one. If a *meditator* can accept the reason why the Buddha preached on this factor, “*pariyodāte*” as crucial one, the way of practice leading to *nibbāna* will be straight forward for him indeed. 

If the *meditator* wants to improve *vipassanā* practice through any kind of concentration, either neighbourhood concentration which is designated as both ***sadisūpacāra*** (= indirect usage due to presence of same degree of concentration with neighbourhood one, as mentioned in Section 2) and direct usage (= real neighbourhood concentration) or any other kinds of full concentration rather than the concentration of fourth absorption, as the fundamental basis of *vipassanā* practice, it must be fulfilled those neighbourhood concentration or full concentration with more or less certain degree of eight noble qualities due to ability to produce brilliant shining lights of those consciousnesses of *samatha* practice really. 

**3.12.I. Confusing between various lights** 

It would be assumed that the *meditator* can accept the preaching that shining lights can be produced by mind of meditation of both *samatha* and *vipassanā*. Here it will be continued to present confusing between various lights. 

When any kind of practice would be begun, some *meditator* usually practise it without differentiating between *samatha* and *vipassanā*. When the concentration had been developed moderately the shining lights usually appear resulting in occurring great impression on himself that he reaches up to *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* (the knowledge of arising and passing away). 

As mentioned repeatedly above, *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* is a kind of knowledge which can be occurred in the continuum of *meditator* who had attained *nāmarūpapariccheda* *ñān* *a* due to ability to discern up  

**PAGE 532** 

to the field of ultimate reality by breaking through three or four kinds of compactness (***ghana***) of corporeality and mentality respectively; who had attained *paccayapariggaha* *ñān* *a* (knowledge on the causal relationship) due to ability to keep in mind successive occurrence of causal *dhamma* and resultant *dhamma*; who is capable of discerning by knowledge which is penetratively reached up to momentary present (***khan*** ***a***   ***paccupanna***) when he performs *vipassanā* practice by means of three general characteristics of corporeal and mental *dhamma* occurring in three kinds of periods, i.e., past, future, present, and two kinds of continuums, internal and external alternatively. 

It is not deserving to expect the attainment of ***tīrana***    ***pariññā*** (full understanding on propagation of *vipassanā* knowledge) called *sammasana* *ñān* *a* and *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* in the continuum of *meditator* who has not attained penetrative knowledge which is able to reach the field of ultimate reality due to inexperience to see corporeal units or due to inability to analyse to break down the compactness of corporeality although corporeal units had been seen; who has not penetrative knowledge which is able to reach the field of ultimate reality of mental *dhamma* due to inability to break down the compactness of mentality which occurs depending upon six clear-sensitivities that has not been seen anymore; who has not attained the knowledge of causal relationship (***paccayapariggaha* *ñān***  ***a***  ) due to accepting on such kind of assumption that “*vipassanā* practice should not be carried out for past, future and present but present period only”; who has not reached to the stage of *ñātapariññā* (full understanding on objects) due to inability to keep in mind systematically on corporeality, mentality, causes and results, called *sańkhāra* *dhamma*. 

If one *meditator* who lacks full understanding on objects (***ñātapariññā***), misleads himself that he had reached *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* when shining lights appear during practising in such way, he will awfully miss to attain *nibbāna* in this very life. This is because of the fact that the Buddha preached in *Aparijānana* *Sutta* (*Sam* -2-249,250) that those sufferings of rounds of rebirth would be ceased only when all kinds of five aggregates which are clung (*upādānakkhandhā*), are known and seen by three kinds of full understanding (*pariññā*). 

Therefore it should not be misled on those lights produced by any way of practice as the light of *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a*. It is noticeable that the consciousness of *samatha* practices can also produce shining lights indeed. 

**3.12.J. A reasonable question** 

If it is true that all consciousnesses of *samatha* and *vipassanā* practices have the efficiency of light, it is a reasonable question that why the light (*obhāsa*) is emphatically explained in the stage of *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a*. The answer is that — there are significant differences between the light produced by consciousness of *samatha* practice and the light produce by consciousnesses of *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* and other *vipassanā* knowledges with the result that it is explained specifically in the stage of *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* indeed. It should be continued to read explanations found in commentary as follows: — 

**PAGE 533** 

*tattha obhāsoti vipassanobhāso*. *tasmim*  *uppanne yogāvacaro* “*na vata me ito pubbe evarūpo obhāso uppannapubbo*, *addhā maggappattosmi phalapattosmī*”*ti amaggameva* “*maggo*”*ti*, *aphalameva ca* “*phala*”*nti gan* *hāti*. *tassa amaggam**  “*maggo*”*ti*, *aphalam**  “*phala*”*nti gan* *hato vipassanāvīthi ukkantā nāma hoti*. *so attano mūlakammat* *t* *hānam*  *vissajjetvā obhāsameva assādento nisīdati*. (*Visuddhi*-2-270) 

Among those ten kinds of *upakkilesa* *dhamma*, which are impurities of *vipassanā* knowledge, “***obhāsa***” (= the light) are brilliant shining rays of colour-elements (*van* *n* *a* *dhātu*) of both corporeal units produced by mind of *vipassanā* practice, which are falling in the continuum of himself, and corporeal units produced by temperature called *utu* *samut* *t* *hāna* *rūpa*, which are successive generations of preceding corporeal units produced by mind, indeed. 

When those shining lights appear the *meditator* usually obsesses the fact “**this kind of light with this nature is inexperienced for me previously**, the Path-Knowledge would be reached, the Fruit-Knowledge would be reached”, resulting in misleading to the light which is not-path as path, the light which is not-fruit as fruit actually. The way of practice called cognitive processes of *vipassanā* (*vipassanā* *vīthi*) of the *meditator* who obsesses the light which is not-path as path, the light which is not-fruit as fruit, is missing from the right course actually. By hiving up usual practice called *vipassanā*, the *meditator* is sitting and pleasing with shining lights. (*Visuddhi*-2-270) 

In above explanations, the phrase which is emphatically intended to say is that — “**this kind of light with this nature is inexperienced for me previously**”. It means the fact that “this kind of light with this nature is inexperienced previously but none of any other lights. Good evidences can be found in explanations relating with remaining *upakkilesa* as follows: — 

“*na vata me ito pubbe evarūpam*  *ñān* *am*  *uppannapubbam* , *evarūpā pīti*, *passaddhi*, *sukham* , *adhimokkho*, *paggaho*, *upat* *t* *hānam* , *upekkhā*, *nikanti uppannapubbā*. (*Visuddhi*-2- 273) 

- This kind of *vipassanā* knowledge with this nature is inexperienced for me previously; this kind of *vipassanā* *pīti* with this nature, this kind of tranquillity (*passaddhi*), this kind of *vipassanā* *sukha*, this kind of *adhimokkha* = faith, this kind of effort, this kind of mindfulness, this kind of equanimity called *upekkhā* (= *vipassanupekkhā* + *āvajjanupekkhā*), this kind of attachment (*nikanti*) with this nature are inexperienced previously. (*Visuddhi*-2- 273) 

In above phrases, it means only this kind of *vipassanā* knowledge with this nature is inexperienced previously but none of any other *vipassanā* knowledge, indeed. 

If one accepts the assumption that “**none of any other *vipassanā* knowledge is inexperienced**  

**PAGE 534** 

**previously**”, it would be misinterpreted that even *sammasana* *ñān* *a* and immature *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* has not been experienced previously. 

Similarly it means the fact that this kind of ***pīti***, ***passaddhi***, ***sukha***, ***saddhā***, ***viriya***, ***sati***, ***upekkhā*** with this nature are inexperienced previously but none of any other *pīti*, *passaddhi*, *sukha*, *saddhā*, *viriya*, *sati*, *upekkhā* throughout the life. 

Similarly, in the explanation on light (*obhāsa*), it is notably the fact that “**only this kind of light with this nature is inexperienced previously but none of any other lights**”, actually. 

If it is so, the reason why the light (*obhāsa*) is emphatically explained in the stage of *udayabbaya*  *ñān* *a* is that — it is emphatically and specifically explained on the light because it is the specific kind of light with quite difference from previous ones and it is capable of misleading to obsess as the supreme lights produced by Noble Path-Knowledge and Fruit- Knowledge. 

*ettha ca obhāsādayo upakkilesavatthutāya upakkilesāti vuttā*, *na akusalattā*. (*Visuddhi*-2-273) 

- Due to occurrence of depended basis of defilements (***upakkilesa* *vatthu***), it is preached on these light, knowledge, pleasurable interest, tranquillity, agreeable feeling, faith, effort, mindfulness, equanimity as *upakkilesa* *dhamma*. It should be recognized the fact that these are not unwholesome *dhamma* (***akusala* *dhamma***) indeed. 

It should be recognized the fact that this light, etc. is emphatically and specifically preached with intention to know the facts that both as if those obsessions of these light etc., that ‘this is I’, ‘this is mine’, ‘this is myself’, ‘this is the Path’, ‘this is the Fruit’, etc., these lights, etc. are depended basis of *upakkilesa* *dhamma* called the craving (*tahn* *ā*), conceit (*māna*), wrong view (*dit* *t* *hi*), and as if it is sitting and pleasing with those lights, etc. but giving up the *vipassanā* practice, the way of practice of *vipassanā* has been missing from right one. 

If the *meditator* had been fulfilled the concentration up to the fourth absorption and he wishes to improve the stage of purification of views (***dit***  ***t*** ***h***     ***i* *visuddhi***) through that concentration of fourth absorption as the fundamental basis of *vipassanā* practice, he should continue to practise in order to complete eight kinds of noble qualities of acquired concentration of fourth absorption, indeed. 

**Page-534 finished on 14/3/2003, 09:00 AM. Translated by *Aññatara* *Bhikkhu*.** 

***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

**PAGE-535** 

**SECTION 4 MEDITION ON CORPOREALITY** (***rūpakammaṭṭhāna***) 

1. ***Paññābhumi-mūla-Sariravavutthāna*  (discriminating  on  realm,  fundamental  and body of wisdom)** 

` `***Pāli Quotation (Visuddhi-2-73)*** 

Above ***Pāli*** quotation found in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** is the answer of the question that how to practice and develop ***vipassanā*** knowledge as a brief account, of which the meaning is as follows. 

1. ***bhumi*** = Various principles of ***dhamma*** i.e, aggregates (***khanda***), bases (***āyatana***), element (***dhātu***), faculty (***indariya***), truth (***sacca***), dependent origination (***paṭicca*** ***samuppāda***), etc.. are called the realm of ***vipassanā*** knowledge (***vipassanā*** ***bhumi***). 
1. ***mūla*** = Two kinds of purification (***visuddhi***), i.e, the purification of virtue (***sīla*** ***visuddhi***) and  the  purification  of  consciousness  (***citta***  ***visuddhi***)  which  is  free  from  hindrances (***nīvaraņa***), are called the fundamental (***mūla***) of ***vipassanā*** knowledge. 
1. ***sarīra*** = Five kinds of purifications, i.e., 
1) purification  of  view  (***diṭṭhi***  ***visuddhi***)  (=the  discriminative  knowledge  on  the corporeality and mentality = ***nāmarūpa*** ***pariccheda*** ***ñāņa***) 
1) purification  by  overcoming  doubt  (***kańkhāvitaraņa***  ***visuddhi***)  (=the  discriminative knowledge on the causes and results (***paccaya*** ***pariggaha*** ***ñāņa***) 
1) purification of  what is path and not path (***maggā*** ***magga*** ***ñāņa*** ***dassana*** ***visuddhi***) (=***sammasana*** ***ñāņa*** and immatured ***udayavaya*** ***ñāņa***) 
1) purification  of  the  course  leading  to  Path-knowledge  (***paṭipadā***  ***ñāņa***  ***dassana*** ***visuddhi***) (upper ***vipassanā*** knowledge) 
1) purification of the Path-knowledge (***ñāņa*** ***dassana*** ***visuddhi***) are called the body of ***vipassanā*** knowledge (***sarira***). 

Therefore, after learning by heart and scrutinize on various principles of  ***dhamma*** called ***vipassanā*** ***bhumi***; and then two kinds of purification called ***vipassanā*** ***mūla*** has been fulfilled; and it should be developed and improved five kinds of purification called the body (***sarira***) of ***vipassanā*** knowledge successively. This is a brief account on “how to practice and develop ***vipassanā*** knowledge”. (***visuddhi***-2-73). 

According to explanation of commentary, mentioned above, a such ***meditator*** who wants to attain ***nibbāna***, must accept  “way of pratice  called seven stages of purification (***visuddhi***)” without any exception, but with full of faith. 

Various principles of ***dhamma*** called ***vipassanā*** ***bhumi*** or the realm of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, should be studied systematically from teachers learned in scriptures previously. 

Two  kinds  of  purification,  i.e.,  the  purification  of  virtue  and  the  purification  of  consciousness must be fulfilled in order to attain the fundamental ***dhamma*** of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, called ***mūla***. 

**Page-536** 

2. **The purification of virtue (*sīla* *visuddhi*)** 

There are four kinds of virtue, i.e., 

1. Restraint with displinary code (***pātimukkha samvara*** ***sīla***) 
1. Restraint with regard to faculties (***indariya*** ***samvara*** ***sīla***) 
1. Restraint with thoroughly purified livelihood (***ājhiva pārisuddhi*** ***sīla***) 
1. Restraint with reflecting on use of four requisites (***paccaya*** ***sannissita*** ***sīla***) The ***meditator*** must be fulfilled those four basic virtue previously. 
1. **Restraint with displinary code** 

In  the  preaching  of  displinary  code  (***vinaya***),  there  are  various  kinds  of  rules designated by the Buddha. Restraining with both fulfilling some designations that “it should be done and fulfilled in this case,” and abstaining to follow some prohibitions that “it should not be done in this case,” is called ***pātimokkha*** ***samvara*** ***sīla***. Laymen devotees must follow at least five precepts called ***pātimukkha*** ***samvara*** ***sīla***. If it is possible, eight precepts, nine precepts and ten precepts, must also be restrained for those persons. 

2. **Restraint with regard to faculties** 

Restraining of the  mind by  means of  any  kind of ***samatha*** or ***vipassanā*** practice continuously in order to prevent the invasion of unwholesome ***dhamma*** through six sense doors called eye-, ear-, nose-, tongue-, body- and mind-door, is called ***indariyasamvara sīla***. It is impossible to fulfill this kind of virtue without any kind of practice. The ***meditator***, therefore, must fulfill continuous practice by which taking the object of ***samatha***, if he is still in the ***samatha*** stage. If the ***meditator*** develops concentration by the mindfulness of breathing (***ānāpānassati bhāvanā***), he must try to keep in mind on any sign of concentration such as sign of preliminary concentration (***parikamma nimitta***), sign of neighbourhood concentration (***uggaha***  ***nimitta***),  sign  of  full  concentration  (***paṭibhāga***  ***nimitta***).  If  a  such  ***meditator***  is capable  of  ***vipassanā***  practice,  he  must  take  place  continuous  discernment  on  ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma*** by means of three general characters called ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, alternatively. This kind of virtue, ***indariya*** ***samvara*** ***sīla***, can be thoroughly purified for only a person who become arahantship. 

**PAGE-537** 

3. **Restraint with thoroughly purified livelihood** 

There are many rules related with the livelihood of ***bhikkhus***. Abstaining from using four requisites which are obtained by misdeed, such as doing wonderful illusions, saying wonderful talk as astrology, persuasion to donate by showing  any sign of bodily  action, relationship to people by “way of give and take” etc,. is called restraint with thoroughly purified livelihood (***ājhiva*** ***pārisuddhi*** ***sīla***). 

For laymen devotees, abstaining from using materials which are obtained by misdeed of  both  bodily,  such  as  killing,  stealing,  sexual  misconduct  and  verbally,  such  as  lying, slandering, harsh speech, flattering  and earning by trading, farming etc,. is called ***ājhiva*** ***pārisuddhi*** ***sīla***. 

4. **Restraint with reflecting on use of four requisites** 

The wholesome volition (***kusala cetanā***) which is occurred by reflecting on use of four requisites during using four requisites, i.e., robes, foods, shelter, medicine, is called ***paccaya*** ***sannissita*** ***sīla***. For arahant, indifferent volition (***kriyā*** ***cetanā***) is ***paccaya*** ***sannissita*** ***sīla***. 

The ***meditator***, if he has fulfilled these four kinds of purified virtue, reaches to the stage of purification of virtue (***sīla*** ***visuddhi***) 

***tattha  sīlavisuddhi  nāma  suparisuddham  pātimokkha  samvarādi  catubbidham sīlam. (Visuddhi-2-222)*** 

3. **The purification of consciousness (*Citta* *Visuddhi*)** 

***Cita visuddhi nāma sapacārā aṭṭha samā pattiyo. (Visuddhi-2-222)*** 

- Eight  kinds  of  absorptions  (***samāpatti***)  including  with  neighbourhood  absorption (=neighbourhood  concentration)  are  called  “the  purification  of  consciousness” (***cittavisuddhi***). (***Visuddhi***-2-222) 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Mahāṭī-2-350)*** **PAGE-538** 

- The  neighbourhood  concentration  can  also  be  called  the  purification  of  consciousness because  it  is  the  fundamental  of  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  like  full  concentration.  The commentator,  therefore,  explained  that  eight  kinds  of  absorptions  including  with neighbourhood concentration are called “the purification of consciousness”. (***Mahāṭī***-***2-350***) Those eight  kinds of  absorptions including with neighbourhood concentration had 

been  explained  in  detail  in  the  portion  of  ***samādhiniddesa***  (detailed  account  on  the concentration)  which  is  regarded  to  consciousness.  Therefore,  it  should  be  known  and fulfilled  eight  kinds  of  absorptions  including  with  neighbourhood  concentration  in accordance with the explanation found in samadhiniddesa. (***Visuddhi***-2-222) 

In this case, “it should be known” (***veditabbā***) means the fact that it should be known by  means  of  occurrence  of  eight  kinds  of  absorptions  including  with  neighbourhood concentration in the continuum of himself practically. 

If it is known by means of occurrence in the continuum of himself, these eight kinds of  absorptions,  including  with  neighbourhood  concentration  are  known  by  practical knowledge (***paccakkha ñāņa***). Therefore, it means that “it should be known and fulfilled eight kinds of absorptions, including with neighbourhood concentration”. (***Mahāṭī***-2-350) 

In other words, the phrase “it should be known” (***veditabbā***) means the fact that it should be feels the taste of absorption (***samāpatti***) after attained it. 

It is right. It is not the situation of the purification of consciousness merely known about “the absorption”. Then if it is not the situation of the purification of consciousness, it is not able to fulfil the upper stage of purification successively. It should be known in this way. (***Mahāṭī***-2-350) 

According to explanations found in commentary and subcommentary, the ***meditator*** who wants to fulfil successive stages of purification, such as purification of view.. etc., must endeavour to fulfil the purification of consciousness after the purification of virtue. It should be noticed especially the fact that it is unable to reach the upper stages of purification without purification of consciousness has been fulfilled. In this work, the way of practice how to develop four kinds of absorptions of world of form, including neighbourhood concentration, through the mindfulness of breathing, had been presented systematically. The ***meditator*** who wants to fulfil the purification of view through the mindfulness of breathing, must develop the concentration either neighbourhood concentration or full concentration of any kind, up to the fourth absorption previously. 

**PAGE-539 4.4.1.1 The purification of view (*diṭṭhi* *visuddhi*)** 

- ***tattha nāmarūpanam yāthāvadassanan diṭṭhivisuddhi nāma. (visuddhi-2-222)*** 
- Knowing and seeing the corporeality and mentality up to the field of ultimate reality by means of analytical knowledge as they really are, is called the purification of view (***diṭṭhi*** ***visuddhi***) 
- ***lakkaņa-rasa-paccupaṭṭhāna-padaṭṭhānavasena nāmarūpapariggaho diṭṭhivisuddhi nāama. (Abhidhammattha sańgaha)*** 
- Discriminative knowledge on the corporeality and mentality by means of characteristic, function,  manifestation  and  proximate  cause  is  called  the  purification  of  view  (***diṭṭhi*** ***visuddhi***). (***Abhidhammattha sańgaha***) 
2. **Genreal rules for two kinds of *meditators* *Pāli*** ***Quotation (Mahāṭī-2-470)*** 
- The beginning of the process taking to heart ***vipassanā*** on the corporeal ***dhamma*** is 

generally  considered  for  ***suddhavipassanāyānika***  (SVY)  person.  The  beginning  of  the process taking to heart on the mental ***dhamma*** is generally considered for ***samathayānika*** (STT) person. The term “***abhinivesa***” (the process of taking into to heart) means that the discriminative  knowledge  on  the  corporeality  and  mentality  (***nāmarūpaparicchedañāņa***) which is previous work to be done before ***vipassanā*** practice. Therefore, previous process of keeping in mind (taking to heart) on the corporeal ***dhamma*** is called ***rupeabhinivesa*** (the beginning  of  the  process  of  taking  ***vipassanā***  on  the  corporeal  ***dhamma***).  The  previous process  of  keeping  in  mind  (taking  to  heart)  on  the  mental  ***dhamma***  is  called  ***arupe abhinivesa***  (the  beginning  of  the  process  of  taking  ***vipassanā***  on  the  mental  ***dhamma***). (***Mahāṭī***-***2-470***) 

This is general rule for two kinds of ***meditators***. 

When STY person takes into to heart the corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** he is able to begin… 

1. either on the mental ***dhamma*** or 
2. on the corporeal ***dhamma***, as he likes. 

If STY person wants to take to heart mental ***dhamma*** first, the way of practice has been instructed in ***Visuddhi*** ***Magga*** as follows. 

**PAGE-540** 

***Pāli* *Quotation* (*Visuddhi*-2-222) two paragraph** 

STY person who has the vehicle of absorption or a such meditate who is called STY person because he usually practices ***vipassanā*** depending on neighbourhood concentration, when they wants to fulfil purification of view, must enter any kind of absorptions of either world  of  form  (***rūpavacara***)  or  formless  world  (***arūpavacara***),  except  the  absorption  of neither-perception-nor-non-perception  (***neva-saññā-nāsaññāyatana***)  previously.  Then  he emerges from that absorption and distinguishes and keep in mind factors of absorption, such as ***vitakka***, ***vicāra*** etc., and associated ***dhamma***, such as ***phassa***, ***vedanā*** etc., by means of characteristic, function, manifestation, proximate cause. 

After distinguished and kept in mind those mental ***dhamma***, it should be recognized separately that “this is called ***nāma*** (the mentality) because of the ability to approach to the object”. 

After  it  is  recognized  separately  on  that  mentality  called  ***nāma***,  the  ***meditator*** scrutinizes the mentality with its vicinity as a simile that when a man see a snake inside the house and follows it, then he find the shelter of that snake, finally, the ***meditator*** see physical base of mind (***hadaya vatthu***). After seeing the physical base of mind, both the four great elements which are depended by the physical base of mind and the remaining secondary ones successively by insight knowledge. In this way, the corporeal ***dhamma*** can be distinguished and kept in mind systematically. 

That ***meditator***  recognized  separately  the  fact  that  “these  four  great  elements  and secondary ones are called ***rūpa*** (the corporeality) because of the presence of ability to change for the worse”. 

After  kept  in  mind  both  the  mentality  and  the  corporeality,  the  ***meditator*** discriminates and recognizes separately in brief, as  

1. those  ***dhamma***  which  is  able  to  approach  the  object  are  called  ***nāma***  (the mentality), 
1. those  ***dhamma***,  which  is  able  to  hange  for  the  worse,  are  called  ***rūpa***  (the corporeality). 

(***visuddhi-2-222***) 

**PAGE-541** 

3. ***Samathayānika* (the vehicle of *samatha*) *Pāli*** ***Quotation (Mahāṭī-2-352)*** 

In the world, a machine with an engine for example a car, that carries people or things from  place  to  place,  is  called  a  vehicle  (***yāna***).  Similarly,  two  kinds  of  concentration, neighbourhood  and  full  concentration,  (also  known  as  ***samatha***),  that  carries  the  noble peoples  to  the  realm  of  ***vipassanā***,  is  also  called  vehicle  of  ***samatha***,  is  known  as ***samathayānika*** (STY) person. It is the name of a person who practises ***vipassanā*** depending upon either the full concentration or the neighbourhood concentration which usually occurs adjacent to the full absorption. (***Mahāṭī-2-352***) 

4. **The  absorption  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  (*neva  saññā nāsaññāyatana jhāna*)** 

***Pāli***-***Quotation (Mahāṭī-2-352)*** 

=The phrase, “except the absorption of neither-perception-nor-non-perception”, had been said by  the  commentator  sayadaw  because  the  fact  that  the  beginner  of  meditation  on  the mentality is very difficult to distinguish and keep in mind the mental ***dhamma*** associating with the absorption of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. (***Mahāṭī-2-352***) 

5. **To  the  stage  of  the  purification  of  view  through  the  way  of  mindfulness  of breathing** 

When a ***meditator*** wants to change to the stage of the purification of the view through the  way  of  mindfulness  of  breathing,  according  to  the  instructions  found  in  above commentary and subcommentary, he must develop concentration previously, which is either the neighbourhood concentration or the full concentration. If the fourth absorption could be attained, it is the excellent one. 

When  the  light  produced  by  concentration  becomes  brilliantly  bright,  he  must emerges from the absorption and takes to heart the factors of absorption firstly. Then mental ***dhamma*** associating with that absorption must be distinguished and kept in mind one by one. After that the depended physical base of mind (***hadaya*** ***vatthu***) associating with the four great elements and secondary ones must be kept in mind continuously. If the ***meditator*** wants to change  from  the  meditation  of  corporeality  to  the purification  of  view,  instead  from  the meditation  of  mentality  to  the  purification  of  view,  he  must  evdeavour  as  the  following instructions found in ***Visuddhi Magga***. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Visuddhi-2-222)*** **PAGE-542** 

SVY person who lacks ***samatha*** but the vehicle of ***vipassanā*** only and STY person with the vehicle of ***samatha*** who wants to begin meditation on the corporeality, if they wants to fulfil the knowledge of purification of view, must discerns and keeps in mind the four great elements by means of either brief account or detailed account explained in the meditation of the four great elements (***catudhātuvavutthāna*** ***kammaṭṭhāna***) previously. (***Visuddhi***-***2-222***) 

After the four great elements had been kept in mind, five aggregates, twelve bases, eighteen elements, twenty two controlling faculties, four Noble Truths, and the nature of casual  relationship  etc.,  must  be  scrutinized  successively  by  insight  knowledge.  This  is because  those  ***dhamma***  are  the  realms  of  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  called  ***vipassanā***  ***bhūmi*** indeed. The Buddha, himself preached in ***Aparijhānana Sutta (Samyotta-2-249-250)*** the fact that only the ***meditator*** who is able to distinguish those ***dhamma*** by means of three kinds of full understanding (***ti-pariññā***), will be able to cease the suffering of round of rebirths. 

6. **The individual preference (*veneyajjhāsaya*)** 

In this case, there is a question that why have many ***dhamma***, such as aggregates, bases, elements, Noble truths, dependent origination nutriment… etc., occurred as realms of ***vipassanā***  and  hasn’t  the  ***meditator***  achieved  the  Path-,  Fruit-Knowledge  and  ***nibbāna*** through  only  a  realm  of  ***vipassanā***.  It  can  be  answered  that  ‘No’.  Because  the  Buddha preached three ways, i.e., the way of five aggregates, the way of twelve bases, the way of eighteen elements in order to praise for three kinds of individual preference. 

There are three kinds of disciples who are able to cease suffering of round of rebirths, as follows. 

1. ***arūpa*** ***sammunhļā*** = the person who wavered on mental ***dhamma*** 
1. ***rūpasammunhļā*** = the person who wavered on the corporeal ***dhamma*** 
1. ***ubaya  sammunhļā***  =  the  person  who  wavered  on  both  corporeal  and  mental ***dhamma*** 

Because there are three kinds of disciples, if the Buddha preached only single way, such as the way of five aggregates, it can not be fairly praised for all beings who can able to cease suffering of round of rebirths really. 

1. ***arūpasammunhļā*** 

Among those three kinds of disciples, some human beings, ***devas*** and brahmas have clear understanding on the corporeal ***dhamma***. They do not waver on the corporeal ***dhamma*** but on the mental ***dhamma*** only. For those kind of disciples, the Buddha instructed to practice the way of five aggregates in which the mind, mental factors and corporeality are divided into five  parts,  i.e.,  clear  understood  corporeal  ***dhamma***  consists  one-fifth,  while  not  clear understood mentak ***dhamma***, four-fifth. 

**PAGE-543** 

2. ***rūpasammunhļā*** 

Some disciples, however, have not  clear understanding on the corporeal ***dhamma*** with the result that there are many difficulties in ***vipassanā*** practice on the corporeal ***dhamma*** as totally. But they do not waver on the mental ***dhamma*** and have clear understanding on it. For those kind of disciples, the Buddha instructed to practice the way of twelve bases in which the  mind,  mental factors and  corporeality  are divided into twelve parts, i.e., clear understood  mental  ***dhamma***  consist  only  one  and  half  parts,  while  not  clear  understood corporeal ***dhamma*** about ten and half parts, respectively. 

3. ***Ubayasammunhļā*** 

Some  disciples  have  not  clear  understanding  on  both  the  corporeal  and  mental ***dhamma***. For those kinds of disciples, the Buddha instructed to practise  the way eighteen elements in which the mind, mental factors and corporeality are divided into eighteen parts, i.e., the corporeal ***dhamma*** consist of about ten and half parts, while the mental ***dhamma***, about seven and half parts respectively. (***Mahāṭī-2-85***) 

7. **Various kinds of controlling faculties (*indariya beda*)** 

There  are  also  three  kinds  of  controlling  faculties  (***indariya***)  among  disciples  as 

follows. 

1. ***Tikkhindariya*** = the person who has brilliant controlling faculties, 
1. ***Majjhimindariya*** = the person who has moderate controlling faculties, 
1. ***Mudindariya*** = the person who has weak controlling faculties, 

For disciples who have matured and brilliant controlling faculties called faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration and knowledge, the Buddha preached the way of five aggregates. Then the way of twelve bases had been instructed for disciples with moderate controlling faculties, while the way of eighteen elements, for disciples with weak controlling faculties, respectively. (***Mahāṭī***-2-85) 

8. **Various kinds of preference** 

There are also three kinds of preference (***ajjhāsaya***) among disciples as follows. 

1. ***samkhittaruci*** = the person who prefers the brief account 
1. ***majjhimaruci*** = the person who prefers the middle account 
1. ***vittahārarui*** = the person who prefers detailed account 

Among  those  three  kinds  of  disciples,  the  Buddha  instructed  the  way  of  five aggregates for the person who prefers the brief account, while the way of twelve bases, for the middle ones, the way of eighteen elements for the third ones, respectively. (***Mahāṭī***-2-85) 

**PAGE-544** 

9. **Important fact to be careful** 

Although it is instructed by means of ways, such as way of five aggregates, way of twelve bases, way of eighteen elements etc., depending on individual preference of different disciples,  the  objects  of  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  are  the  same  among  those  ways,  i.e,  the mundane mind, mental factors and corporeal ***dhamma*** which are individual of some kinds. There is no difference among the ultimate mentality and corporeality although each portion of  different  ways,  as  five  parts,  12  parts,  18  parts,  are  different  from  other  preaching methodologically. 

10. **Twenty two kinds of controlling faculties** 

The mind, mental factors and corporeal ***dhamma*** can be divided into 22 parts which are called controlling faculties (***indariya***). It is instructed to practise by means of the way of controlling  faculties  in which  mundane  controlling faculties  are  the  objects  of ***vipassanā*** knowledge. 

Those ***dhamma*** which are able to deserve as controlling faculty, can be occurred  a chief  of  associated  ***dhamma***  as  a  king  with  full  authority.  However,  the  occurrence  of controlling faculty or the occurrence of chief has been achieved by means of the nature of those ***dhamma*** accordingly. There is no person by which those ***dhamma*** can be occurred in accordance with his desire, indeed. These ***dhamma*** known as controlling faculties are viod of self (***atta***) with full authority. These ***dhamma*** are unable to occur according to the desire of self (***atta***) but non-self (***anatta***). In this way, the Buddha instructed to take place ***vipassanā*** practice by way of controlling faculties in order to attain easily the knowledge of non-self (***anatta***). (***Mahāṭī***-***2-85***) 

11. **The Noble Truths and Dependant Origination** 
1. ***pavutti*** = the nature of occurrence ( = the Noble Truth of Suffering) 
1. ***pavutti*** hetu = the cause of occurrence ( = the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering) 
1. ***nivutti*** = the nature of cessation ( = the Noble Truth of Cessation of Suffering) 
4. ***nivuttihetu*** = the cause of cessation( = the Noble Truth of The Course leading to Cessation of Suffering) 

Four kinds of ***dhamma*** known as aggregates, bases, elements and controlling faculties are able to take place effective results only when those ***dhamma*** has been known by four modes mentioned above, i.e., ***pavutti***, ***pavuttihetu***, ***nivutti***, ***nivuttihetu***. The effective results can not be occurred unless it is known by four modes successively. The Buddha, therefore, preached preaching methodology of the Noble Truth and Dependent Origination additionally. (***Mahāṭī***-2-85) 

In this way, although the desired result can be fulfilled by any one kind of preaching methodology, such as five aggregates, the Buddha preached various kinds of methodologies in order to praise three kinds of disciples whose preference are different to each other. It should not be neglected the fact that although preaching methodologies are different among disiples, the ultimate reality of the corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** are the same qualitatively, indeed. (***Mahāṭī***-***2-85***) 

**PAGE-545 4.5  Twenty eight kinds of corporealities** 

When STY person change to the stage of purification of view from that of purification of consciousness there are two ways, i.e., beginning with mental object and beginning with corporeal object, and the lather would be presented now. Twenty eight kinds of corporealities would like to presented previously, as follows. 

1. **The four great elements (*catu mahābhūta*)** 
1) **The earth-element (*pathavī* *dhātu*)** 

**heavy group**  **light group** 

\1. character of hardness  2. character of softness 

\3. character of roughness  4. character of smoothness 

\5. character of heaviness  6. character of lightness 

(***Abhi-1-170.Dhammasangani***) ***Pāli*** ***Quotation  (Abhi-Com-1-368)*** 

2) **The water-element (*āpo* *dhātu*)** 
1. ***daravabhāva = paggharaņa lakkhaņa*** = the character of flowing 
1. ***ābandhanabhāva = ābandhana lakkhaņa*** = the character of cohesion 

**PAGE-546** 

3) **The fire-element (*tejo* *dhātu*)** 
1. (a) ***uņņhabhāva = uņņhatejo*** = character of heat  

(b) ***sītabhāva = sītatejo*** = character of coldness 

2. ***paripācanabhāva*** = the character of mature 
4) **The air-element (*vāyo* *dhātu*)** 
1. ***vitthambhanabhāva*** = the character of supporting 
2. ***samudīraņabhāva*** = the character of pushing 
5) **Five clear sensitivities (*Pasāda* *rūpa***) 
1. ***cakkhupasāda*** = eye clear sensitivity 
1. ***sotapasāda*** = ear clear sensitivity 
1. ***ghānapasāda*** = nose clear sensitivity 
1. ***jihvāpasāda*** = tongue clear sensitivity 
1. ***kāyapasāda*** = body clear sensitivity 

   6) **seven pasture (object) corporeality (*gocara* *rūpa*)** 
1. ***rūpārammaņa*** = colour = visible object 
1. ***saddārammaņa*** = sound = acoustic object 
1. ***gandhārammaņa*** = smell = olfactory object 
1. ***rasārammaņa*** = taste 
1. ***phoṭṭhabbārammaņa*** = touch = tactile object  ( = earth-element, fire-element, air- element) 

(Notes. The earth-element, the fire-element and the air-element can be sensitive to touch, which are known as tactile elements (***phoṭṭhabbadhātu***) resulting 7 kinds of tactile objects totally. When the number of kinds of corporealities are counted those three elements are already counted in the four great ones and rejected. There are no separated (special) tactile objects but those three elements mentioned above.) 

7) **Sex corporeality (*bhāvarūpa*)** 
1. ***itthibhāva*** ***rūpa*** = fiminity 
1. ***purisabhāva*** ***rūpa*** = virility 

(Notes. It is only one sex corporeality in female and male respectively as a general. The sex corporeality spread throughout body. Sometimes hermaphroditism can be occurred in some persons and it is said that “as a general”. However only one kind of sex corporeality can be occurred at specific time of a hermaphrodite alternatively. (***Abhi-Com-1-359***) 

8) **One physical base of mind (*hadaya* *rūpa*)** 

***Hadaya*** (***vatthu***) ***rūpa*** = It is the physical base of mind on which the life-continuum (***manodhātu***)  and  all  consciousness  (***pañcaviññāņa***),  i.e.,  seeing-,  hearing-,  smelling-, tasting- and touching-consciousness; (***manoviññāņadhātu***) occur. 

[Notes: The physical base of mind is consisting in the base-decad (***hadayasakalāpa***) which is spreading  in  the blood  within  a  tiny pit  of  heart, and  it  is  also  known  as ***hadayavatthu*** depending  on  which  the  life-continuum  (***manodhātu***)  and  all  consciousness  of  though processes (***mano***vin***ñāņadhātu***), except penta-consciousness, such as seeing-consciousness . etc. This term refers to only the realm of five aggregates (***pañcavokāra*** ***bhūmi***)] 

**PAGE-547** 

9) **One life-faculty of corporeality** 

***jīvitindare*** = life-faculty of corporeality or life-faculty element 

This kind of corporeality protects remaining corporealities within the same corporeal unit produced by ***kamma*** which are spreading throughout body. 

10) **One nutriment (*āhāraja* *rūpa*)** 

***kabaļīkāraāhāra*** = the nutriment consisting the food ingested 

(Notes: The nutriment (***āhāraja*** ***rūpa***) consists in every kind of corporeal unit, i.e. corporeal unit  produced  by  ***kamma***,  corporeal  unit  produced  by  mind,  corporeal  unit  produced  by temperature,  corporeal  unit  produced  by  nutriment.  (see  tables  of  ***Rūpa***  ***Kammaṭṭhāna***). Those nutriments are called ***kammaja aja, cittajaojā, utuja-ojā*** respectively. All ingested food, it may be any kind before eating, after ingested and inside the stomach, or feces in the rectum,  are  pure  octad  produced  by  temperature  (***utujaojaṭṭhamaka  kalāpa***)  which proliferates continuously by temperature. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Visuddhi-2-223)*** 

That kind of nutriment consisting in the pure octad produced by temperature is called ***kabaļīkāraāhār***a  according  to  Abhi-Com-1-366.  When  that  nutriments  consisting  in  the ingested food are supported by the heat of vital nonad (***jīvita navaka kalāpa***) inside the stomach, they become new generation of octads which have the eight factor, the nutriment, and are called octads produced by nutriments (***ojaṭṭhamaka kalāpa***) successively. It is also known as ***āhārasamutthāna*** ***rūpa*** (the corporeality produced by nutriment). (***Visuddhi***-2- 251).  The  nutriment  consisting  in  the  octad produced by  nutriment  of ***utujaojaṭṭhamaka*** ***kalāpa*** is called ***āhārajajā***. When ***kammajaojā***, ***cittaja ojā*** and ***utujaojā*** are supported by ***āhārajaojā***  in  turn,  the  new  generations  of  ***Ojaṭṭhamaka  kalāpa***  (octads  produced  by nutriments) can be occurred successively. 

**PAGE-548** 

- ***ekadivasam paributtahāro sattāhampi uppatthambeti. (Visuddhi-2-251)*** 
- The ingested food for one day will be able to support for throughout seven days. (***Visuddhi***- 2-251) According to above quotation, only once ingested ***kabaļīkāraāhāra*** (the nutriment within corporeal units produced by temperature), if it is attained supporting of heat of vital nonad (***jīvita navaka kalāpa***), can give rise to successive generations of corporeal units called ***ojaṭṭhāmaka*** ***kalāpa*** (octad produced by nutriment) throughout seven days without taking foods. In this way the nutriments containing in the previous ***ojaṭṭhāmaka*** ***kalāpa***, if it is supported by nutriments containing in later ***ojaṭṭhāmaka*** ***kalāpa*** again,  can produce new generations of corporeal units produced by nutriment, up to 10-12 generations successively. According  to  explanations  mentioned  above,  during the  function  of  nutriments  of 

various kinds i.e., ***kamma***, mind, temperature and nutriment, has been taken place, in other words, during the function of nutriments of four resources is producing new generations of corporeal  units,  it  depend  on  the  nutriment  produced  by  temperature  (***kabaļīkāraāhāra***). Therefore, the commentator explained as follows. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Abhi-A-3-337)*** 

=The nutriment deserving to ingest as a mouthful or morsel of rice is called ***kabaļīkāra***, which is synonym of ‘nutriments of four resources’ (***catusamuṭṭhānika ojā***). It is explained by second way, according to second explanation found in the commentary. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Pahāna-1-7) (Abhi-A-3-377)*** 

According to ***Pāli***, and commentary mentioned above, four kinds of nutriments, i.e., the  nutriment  produced  by  mind,  the  nutriment  produced  by  temperature,  the  nutriment produced by nutriment, are called ***kabaļīkāraāhāra***. 

The  nutriment  deserving  to  ingest  as  a  mouthful  or  morsel  of  rice,  a  group  of corporeal units produced by temperature is called ***kabaļīkāraāhāra***, directly. The nutriment containing in those corporeal units become pure octad produced by nutriment when the heat of vital nonad support convertion of that process. Then the converted nutriment is called ***āhāraja*** ***ojā*** (The nutriment onsisting in corporeal units of new generation). Because of the presence of supporting factor of those ***āhāraja*** ***ojā***, four kinds of nutriments, ***kammaja*** ***oja, sittajaoja,  utujaoja***,  and  previous  ***āhārajaojā***,  are  able  to  take  place  their  functions respectively,  these  nutriments  are  called  ***kabaļīkāraāhāra***  as  a  metaphor  known  as ***ṭhānupacāra*** (nutriments of four resources situates on ingested ***kabaļīkāraāhāra***). Detailed account can be seen in later. 

**PAGE-549** 

2. **Real comporeality** 
1) (18)  kinds  of  corporealities  mentioned  above  are  called  “natural  corporealities” (***sabhāvarūpa***) because each corporeality has the ultimate specific character (***sabhāva lakkhaņa***) respectively. 
1) Those  corporealities  mentioned  above  are  also  called  “characteristic  corporeality (***salakkhaņa***  ***rūpa***)  because  each  corporeality  has  general  characters  (***sāmañña*** ***lakkhaņa***) which are related to all kinds of corporeal and mental ***dhamma***, as follows. 
1. ***aniccatā*** = mode of perishing away just after arise 
1. ***dukkhatā*** = mode of being oppressed by the process of arising and perishing away continuously. 
1. ***anattatā*** = mode of the absence of durable solid called self (***atta***) which is not nondestratable essence. 
3) Those corporealities mentioned asbove are also called “conspicuous corporealities” (***nipphanarūpa***)  because  it  can  be  produced  by  four  causes,  i.e,  ***kamma***,  mind, temperature and nutriment 
3) Those corporealities mentioned above are also called “real orporealities” (***rūpa*** ***rūpa***) because they always have ability to change for worse. 
3) Those  corporealities  mentioned  above  are  also  called  “object  corporealities” (***samasana*** ***rūpa***\_ because three general characters, i.e., ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, can be took place on objects of those corporealities. 

The following (10) kinds of corporealities are different from (18) kinds mentioned above and are called 

1) artificial corporeality (***asabhāva*** ***rūpa***) 
1) non-characteristic corporeality (***alakkhaņarūpa***) 
1) unconspicuous corporeality (***anipphanna*** ***rūpa***) 
1) false corporeality (***arūparūpa***) 
5) non-object corporeality (***asammasanarūpa***) 
3. **(10) kinds of unconspicuous corporealities (*anipphanna* *rūpa*)** 
1) Space corporality one 
1. ***ākāsadhātu*** = It is inter-***kalāpa***l (inter-corporeal units) space between various kinds of corporeal  units,  which  is  able  to  separate  corporeal  units  each  other.  It  is  called  “space corporeality” (***pariccheda*** ***rūpa***) due to separate each other among corporeal units. 

   2) Distinet behavioural corporealities (5) 
1) Two kinds of expressive corporealities (***viññatti*** ***rūpa***) 
1. ***kaya vviññatti*** = bodily expression which convey a message or feeling 
1. ***vacī*** v***viññatti*** = verbal expression which convey a massage or feeling. 

**PAGE-550** 

***Viññatti*** (expression) 

The special expression (***viññatti***) which is able to convey a massage or feeling of oneself  in  order  to  know  attitude  or  intentions  of  that  person.  Bodily  expression (***kāyaviññatti***) is a kind of gesture by which express internal desire to other, eg. Movement of hand. Verbal expression (***vacīviññatti***) is a kind of behavior by which express internal desire to other, eg. Come on! Call by words. 

2) Behavioral corporealities (3) 
1. ***lahutā*** = physical agility 

(i) character of agility of corporeality produced by mind (ii) character of agility of corporeality produced by temperature (iii) character of agility of corporeality produced by nutriment 

2. ***mudutā*** = physical elasticity 

(i) character of elasticity of corporeality produced by mind (ii) character of elasticity of corporeality produced by temperature (iii) character of elasticity of corporeality produced by nutriment 

3. ***kammaññatā*** = physical adaptability 

(i) character of adaptability of corporeality produced by mind (ii) character of adaptability of corporeality produced by temperature 

(iii) character of adaptability of corporeality by nutriment 

These three  kinds of  corporealities and two  kinds of expressive corporealities are known as distinct behavioural corporealities ***(vikāra*** ***rūpa***). 

(4) Four physical characters of corporeality (***lakkhaņa*** ***rūpa***) 

1. ***upacaya*** = (a) the nature of the beginning of real corporealities of one life 

(b) the nature of improvement of real corporealities up to completion of a life 

that it should contain 

2. ***santati*** = the nature of continuity of real corporealities from sensual faculties has been completed 

[Notes: The Buddha preached two ways separately depending upon individual preference of disciples who were listening ***dhamma*** talk in ***Tavatinsā***, world of *deva*. These two kinds of  corporealities,  i.e.,  ***upacaya***  and  ***santati***,  are  the  same  in  the  nature  of  arising  of  real corporealities (***rūpassa uppāda***), indeed.] 

**PAGE-551** 
PAGE41
