PAGE36

***NIBBÃNAGÃMINI PAT*. *IPADÃ*** ((((WWWWAAAAYYYY    OOOOFFFF    PPPPRRRRAAAACCCCTTTTIIIICCCCEEEE    LLLLEEEEAAAADDDDIIIINNNNGGGG    NNNNIIIIBBBBBBBBÃÃÃÃNNNNAAAA))))    

**by** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYÃDAW** 

**NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** 

SECTION OF *NĀAMAKAMMAŢŢHĀNA* 

(**PRACTICE ON MENTALITY**) ***VOLUME I***  

**Page 1 - 185** 

***BY*** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**&** 

**Dr. Khin Maung Aye (Ph.D, Messey)** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiţakadhara*)** 

*Namo tassa Bhagavato Arahato Sammâsambuddhassa!* Homage to the Exalted One, the *Arahat* Buddha Supreme 

*Mahânamakkâra - Buddhapanâma* 

I begin with due respect to the Buddha 

*Munendakko yek*.*o*  *dayudayarun*. *o*.*  *ñân*. *avitthin*...*n*  *abimbo, vineyappâ*. *nogham kamlakathitam dhamaramsivarehi. Subodhesi sud*.*d* *he* .*t* *ibhavakuha*. *re b*.*y* *âpitakkit*.*t* *inañca, tilokekaccakkum dukhasahanam tam mahesim namâmi.* 

*Dayudayarun*. *o =* being possessed of a great compassion, like the morning sun which brings forth light to the darkness.  *Ñânavittin*..*n* *abembo* = having *sabbaññuta ñân*. *a* of  expansive  magnitude.   *Eko*  =  having  appeared  in  this  universe  and  being  single 

. 

. 

. 

- . 

uncompared.  *Yomunendakko* = the Buddha the brilliant sun.  *Suddhe* = being beautiful, clean and peaceful.  *Tibhavakuhare* = being at three life and three spheres, the so-called *karma-rûpa-arûpa*.  *Nibbattam* = already made His appearance  by virtue of the *parami* (perfection  or  perfect  past  deeds).   *Kamlakathitam*  =  to  be  nominated  as  a  “lotus”.  *Vineyappânoyam* = to those humans, *devâ*s, brahma and many a living beings. *Dhamma*- *ramsivarehi* = with the light of noble *desanâ* of the noble-beings which enables living beings to see the right path to *nibbâna*.  *Subodhesi* = has arisen with the ability to see the 

` `Four Ultimate Reality with penetrative eye of wisdom. 

characte*B*r*y*) *â*i*p*n*i* *t*t*i*h*k*i*k*s*i* *t*l*t*i*i*v*n*i*a*n*ñ*g*c* w*a* o=rl db aencda urseea cohfin  gth teh ei n*b*c*y*o*a*m*m*p*m*a*â*ra pbllaen e*s*.*î* *l* *aT-islaomkeâkdahcic-epkakñhñuâm* .  (=g otohde  single eye for the three planes of *byammâ*, *devâ*s and humans.  *Dukhamasahanam* = 

tolerating, like the great earth, things  untolerable.  *Mahesim* = having acquired, by way of  investigating  and  paractising,  special  characters  such  as  *sîlakkhandha*,  *samâ*. *dhik*- *khandha*, *p*. *aññakkhandha*, *vimuttikkhandha* and *v*.*i* *muttiñânadassanakkhadha*.  *Tam mu- nindakkam* = To that sun called the Buddha. *Aham* = I. *Namâmi* = Begin, with faith and humbleness, paying homage by three *cetana*s *kâya*, *vacî* and *mano* through the three doors. 

**An Auspicious Night (*Bhaddekarattasuttan*)** 

Before *Bhaddekarattasuttan*, description will be first made of *paccekkha ñân*. *a* (the practical knowledge) and *anvaya ñâ*.*n* *a* (theoretical knowledge), related to meditating on the past and future, which the *yogavacara* persons (practicing individuals) should know beforehand. 

***Paccekkha Ñân***. ***a* and *Anvaya Ñân***. ***a*** 

(The Practical and Theoretical Knowledge) 

*Aniccatto manasikarato adhimokkhabhahulassa saddhindriyana*.  *âdhipateyam*.  *hoti, bhâvanâya cattârindriyâni tadanvayâ hunti* (*Padisam.-*: 245). 

***Tadanvayâ hontî**ti* *tam*.  *anugâminî tam*.  *anuvuttinî hunti* (*Padisam*.*.* *-* .*T* .*t* *ha*.- 2: 161). 

. 

*Paññavato bhikkhave ariysaâvakassa radanvayâ saddhâ santhâti*, ... (*Sam*.-3: 195). 

- . 

***Tadanvayâ**ti tam anugacchamânâ*, *anuvuttamânâti atto* (*Sam*.- *Tha*.- 3: 279). 

. 

*p**A**a**n**ñ**v**c**a**a**y**k**e**k h**ñ**a**â**n*.*n* *dahnât id chautktâkrhia ssaaccccâanmi*.*  ,*p* *aaycacmakekvhaa ttatoh ndâis svaâm yuadthaây aidsaâcnai*,*m* *e*., *v* *auyma mateîvteap ni iirmoedvhao  niro*.*d* *hasaccam*. , *ayameva maggo maggasaccanti evum*.  *tassa ñân*. *assa anugatiyam*.*   

`   `*ñânam* (*Dî.-T*. .*t* *ha*.-3: 202).  . 

`   `***Anvaya ñân***. *antianugamana ñân*. *am*.  ***Paccekkhato disvâ**ti cattâri saccâni magga-* 

`  `*ñânen*. *a paccakkhatto disvâ* (*Dî.-T*. *î.*-3: 234). 

In accordance with the above *Atthakathâ dîkâ* (Commentary) *anvaya* is of two kinds: *tadanvaya dhamma* and *anvaya ñân*. *a*.  Then the *anvaya ñâ*.*n* *a* too is of  

1. One that consistently follows *Vipassanâ Ñân*. *a* (insight knowledge) and 
1. One that consistently follows the *Ariya Magga Ñâ*.*n* *a* and *Phala* *Ñâ*.*n* *a* (Noble Path  

`         `knowledge and Fruit knowledge). 

- . 

Of these two the *anvaya ñâna* that consistently follows *Vipassanâ Ñâna* will first 

be dealt with. 

*Jânato aham*.  *bhikkha***E***ve***x*** **t***p***r***a***a***s***c***s***t***a***s***t* **f***o***r*** **o***â***m***sa*** *v**U**a**p**m*.***a***  ***n**k**i**h**s**a**s**y**a**a**su**m**t***. ***t*** *v**a**a**n**d*** *âmi,* .*n* *o ajânato no ajânako no apa*.*s* *sato.  Kañca bhikhave jânato tim passato âsavânam khayo koti.]* 

1. *Iti rûpam, iti rûpassa samudayo*, *iti rûpassa atthañgamo*. 
1. *Iti vedanâ*.  R 
1. *Iti saññâ.*   R 
1. *Iti sañkhâra*.*.**   R*  . 
1. *Iti viññânam*, *iti viññanassa samudayo*, *iti viññânassa atthañgamoti* (*Sam*.-1: 267). 

Noble Ones ... I preach the nature of *Ariya Magga* and *Phala* (Noble Path and Fruit), where all *âsava* (cankers) are not present any more, only to those who on their own know penetratively by  *sammâditthi ñân*. *a* (the knowledge of right understanding) and who see penetratively by *sammâditthi ñâ*.*n* *a*.  I do not preach to those who do not know or see on their own penetratively by *sammâditthi ñân*. *a*.   

Noble Ones ... what is that they know and see on their own penetratively by *sammâditthi ñâna* so that *âsava*-free *Ariya Magga* and *Phala* are attained? 

1. (a)  This is (*rûpa*) corporeality, 

   2) These are the nature and cause of corporeality, 
   2) These are the nature and cause of cessation of corporeality. 
1. (a)  This is *vedanâ* (suffering), 

   2) These are the nature and cause of the *vedanâ*, 
   2) These are the nature and cause of cessation of *vedanâ*. 
1. (a)  This is *saññâ* (perception) 

   2) These are the nature and cause of *saññâ*, 
   2) These are the nature and cause of  cessation of *saññâ*. 
1. (a)  These are the *cetasika* (mind and mental properties), 

   2) These are the nature and cause of *cetasika*, 
   2) These are the nature and cause of cessation of *cetasika*. 
1. (a)  This is *viññâna* (cognition), 
2) These are the nature and cause of *viññâna*,  
2) These are the nature and cause of cessation of *viññâna*. 

Only  those  individuals  who  see  and  know  the  above  five  penetratively  by knowledge of righ.t  understanding (*samâditthi ñân*. *a*)  can the *âsava*-free *Ariya Magga* and  *Phala* appear (*Sam*.-1: 267). 

What this *desanâ* (doctrine) means is as follows: 

1. The five corporeality 
1. The cause or formation of these five = formed with *samudaya* (arising) = *samudaya*  
- nature of rising 
3. Cessation of these five corporeality = ceased with disappearance = disappearance =  

`         `the  nature  of  disappearance  with  time  (or  age).   Only  when  these  three  are penetratively known and seen by *sammâditthi ñân*. *a* can *Ariya Magga Ñân*. *a* and *Phala*  *Ñân*. *a*, wherein all the *âsava* have ceased, be attained. 

The Commentaries and Subcommentaries have explicitly have explained these as 

` `given below. 

***Jânato**ti jânantassa.  **Passato**ti passantassa.  Dvepi padâni ekatthâni,*.*  *byañjâna- meva ñâ*.*n* *am*. *.  E*.*v* *um*.  *sante*.*p* *i “jânato”ti ñân*. *alakkhan*. *am*.  *u*. *pâdâya puggalam niddisati.*  

*Jân*.*e* *nalakkha*.*n* . *am hi ñân*. *am.*  “*Passato”ti ñâ*.*n* *appabhâvum upâdâya*.  *Passanappabhâ- vum hi ñân*. *am, ñâ*.*n* *asamañgipuggalo cakkhumâ viya cakkhunâ rûpâni, ñân*. *ena vivutte  passati.*  R. 

***No ajânato no apassato**ti yo pana na jânâti na passati, tassa no vadâmîti atto. Etena ye ajânato apassatopi samsâradîhiyeva suddim*.  *vadanti*, *tepatikk*.*h* *attâ hunti. Purimena padadvâyena upâyo vutto, iminâ anupâyam patisedheti* (*Sam.-Tha.-*2: 49*).* 

1. ***Jânato passato**ti ittha dassanam*.  *paññâcakkhunâti âha* “***dvepi padâni ekatthânî**”ti.* 

*Evum santepîti padadvâyassa ekatthatepi ñânalakkhana ñ*.*â* *nappabhavavissayassa tathâ- dassanabhâvavirodhanâti attho.  Tenâha* “***jânalakkhanam hi ñân***. ***a**”ati âdi.  **Ñânappa- bhavun**ti ñânubhâvena ñânakiccavisayobhâanti attho.  Tenâha* “***ñân***. __*a* *vivatte dhamme- passatî*__*”ti.  Jânato passa*.*t* *oti ca jânanadassan*.*a* *mokkhena puggalâdhithânâ desanâ pavut- tâti âha “ñâ*.*n* *alakkhanam upâdâyâ*”*tiâdi* (*Sam.-T*. *i.-*2: 63)*.*  

` `“***Ñânalakkha**nanti ñânassa sabhâvum, visayassa yathâsabhâvabonanti attho* (*Ma.*-*Tî*.-1:  146).* 

- . 

*Ñânappabhâvanti ñân*. *ânubhavum, ñânakiccam visayobhasananti attho* (*Ma.*-*T*. *î*.- 

1: 146-147). 

. 

2. ***Jânato***ti *vâ pubbabhâgañânen*. *a jânato*, *aparabhâgena ñân*. *ena **passato*** (*Sam.-* 

   20. *î.-* 2: .6 3). 
3. ***Jânato**ti vâ vatvâ na jânanam anussavâkâraparivita*.*k* *kamattavasana idhâdhip-* *petam, attha kho rûpânivîya*.  *cakkhuviññâ*.*n* *ena rûpâd*.*î*  *tesam ca samuday*.*â* *dike paccekkhe katvâ dassananti vibhâvetum “**passato**ti*.*  *vuttanti evum vâ ittha attho* (*Sam.-Tî.-* 2: 63). 

*Jânato eva passato evâti evemett*.*h* *a niyamo*.  *icchito, na aññatthâ visesâbhâvato anitthâpannovâti tassa niyamassa phalam dassetum “**no ajânato no apassato***”*ti **vittanti*** 

*âha “**yopana na jânâti, na passati, tassa no vadâmîti a***.***t*** ***tho***”*ti*.  *Iminâ Khandhânam*.   *pariññâ âsavekkhayassa ekantikakârananti dasseti* (*Sam.- T*. *î.-*2: 64). 

`          `*Paccekkhakaranatthena ñâtapariññâ tîranapriññâ ca gahitâ hoti* (*Sam.- T*. *î.-*2: 65). are  The meaning in the opening of.  .t he above Commentaries and Subcommentaries  

*Jânato* = to the ones who know, *passato* = to the ones who see.  These two .w  ords have similar meaning, the difference being in the wording.  Though the two words of different structural pattern bear a similar meaning, *jânato* refers to the one having ability to  understand  the  nature  of  concentration  rightly  and  penetratively.   Indeed,  *ñâ*.*n* *a* (knowledge), i.e., *sammâdhitthi ñâ*.*n* *a*, possesses the character of understanding the true nature of concentration penetratively. 

*Passato* refers to the ones who see the true nature of concentration by the power of *ñâ*.*n* *a*.  Indeed, *ñâ*.*n* *a* (*sammâditthi ñân*. *a*) is endowed with the power of seeing the true nature of concentration.  As the form and figure are seen by one through the sense of physical eye (cognition by sight), so also the ones  with *sammâd*. *itthi ñâna* s. ee the true 

` `nature of concentration through the light shone by the ñâna (*Sam.-Tha*.-2: 49). 

*No ajânato no apassato*.  To him who knows not and sees not [craving for the five aggregates, the nature of suffering due to these, and *atthiñgama* (disappearance)] I do not preach the *Ariya Magga Phala* (Noble Path), the terminus of *âsava*.  This is the concept of what has been said above.  By the concept of *No ajânato no apassato*, those who see not and know not, still in the sphere of rounds of rebirth, are p. reaching the freedom from  rounds of rebirth.  Such individuals must be disregarded (*Sam*.-*Tha*.-2: 49). 

Again the Venerable Sayadaw explained the concept of the above in three ways: 

__1.  *No ajânato no*__ __*apassato*__ = to him who knows and sees. 

In these two, “sees” should be taken philosophically as to see with eye of wisdom.  *Mansa cakkhu* (*pasâda cakkhu*), the sight through physical (or absolute) eye, should not  be taken as its real meaning.  Therefore, the two terms *jânato* (he who knows), *passato*  (he who sees) have similar conceptual sense. 

*Evum*.  *santepi* = The expression that “though these two words have different 

structural pattern, of similar meaning” indicates *jânato* = to him who knows, *passato* = to him who sees, have same essence. 

1. Concentration of the (*ñânalakkhana* ) character of the knowledge which penetratively  

` `knows the nature of  the obj..e  ct. 

2. The nature of knowledge (*ñânappabhâva*) which shed light so that the nature of the  

object can be visualized.  . 

The sense of the nature of ability to see, as mentioned above, has been described by two different words because they do not oppose one another in their conceptual sense.   Therefore, the commentator has stated *jânanalakkhanam hi ñânam* = knowledge has the character of knowing the true nature of the object penetratively. 

*Ñâ*.*n* *appabhâva* possesses the nature light which enables one to see the  nature the object  rightly  by  the  light  shed  by  the  power  of  wisdom.   (This  is  in  concord  with *visayobhâsarasâ padîpodiya* in the Commentary *Atthasâlinî* (*Abhi*.- *Tha*.-1:166).  That is why the Commentator Sayadaw has expatiated *ñânena vivate dhamme passati* =  he who has *samâditthi ñâna* (right of wisdom) can see the *dhamma* by the shining light of knowledge (*Sam.-tî.-*2-63). 

[N.B.  The Light of Wisdom is treated on pp. ........... in this volume] 

2. In another way *janato* means he who knows by knowledge what has come in the past. 
3. In another way *passato* means he who knows by knowledge what is to come in 

`        `future. 

1) *Anussava* (hearsay, report)  via your teachers and parents you come to know by your knowledge 
1) *Ãkâparitakka* (study of condition, careful consideration) you come to know via  your thought and logical reasoning. 

`  `Just knowing by such knowledge is not applicable here.  In fact, it is like just as visualizing corporeality’s by physical eye, the following should be visualized by eye of wisdom: 

(i)  *Rûpa* (material quality), *vedanâ* (suffering), *saññâ* (perception), *sankhâra*  

` `(impermanence), *viñañ* (cognition)--the five aggregates.  as object.s  of grasping, 

`           `(ii)  The origin of the cause of arising and the nature of these five aggregates as objects of grasping, 

(iii)  The cause and nature of cessation of these five aggregates = the nature of  *udaya* (disappearance or destruction).   

To make visualizing the above three more explicit, note that the Buddha preached *passato* = to him who sees to stress the point that only he who see. s by his own eye of  wisdom through *paccekkha ñâ*.*n* *a* or the practical knowledge (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 63). 

***Anussava* and *Ãkâparitakka*** 

Here *anussava* and *âkâparitakka* are once again explained. 

- . 

_Anu anu savanam **anussavo**_** (_Sam. Tî_.-2: 166). 

*Pramparâgatassa evum*.  *kirassâti* ***anussavanam***.  (*Sam*. *. Tî*.-2: 317). 

The knowledge handed down from the parents, grand and great grand parents and the teachers = what you know is termed as *anussava*.  In this *Upanissa sutta* ***janato* =** to him who knows**, *passato* =** to him who sees are indicated not for those who just know, by his knowledge handed down from his forefathers and teachers, the five aggregates of grasping,  the  cause  and  nature  of  cessation  of  these  five  aggregates  =  the  nature  of *atthiñgama* (disappearance or destruction).   This kind of knowledge does not represent  the knowledge of eradication of factors of *âsava*. 

. 

***Ãkâraparisakkoti yuttiparikappanâ*** (*Sam. T*. *î*.-2: 317).** 

Thinking,  reasoning  and  analysis  of  the  logic  of  factors  is  referred  to  as *ãkâraparisakka*.  In *Upanissa sutta* too *janato* = to him who knows, *passato* = to him who sees do not refer to the one who just know by knowledge of *ãkâraparisakka*.  [Lord Buddha’s *dhamma* are not a field of *atakkâvacara* (impractical) *takkîs* (thinkers)] (Ma.-2: 291). 

***Paccekkha Ñâna*** 

. 

*Katamâ  ca  bhikkhave  sammâdotthi,  yan  kho  bhikkave  dukkhe  ñânam,  dukkha* *samu*.*d*  *aye ñân*. *am*. *, dukkha nirodhe ñânam*.*,*  *dukkha nirodhagâminiyâ patipadâya ñâna*.*m*  *.* .*  

*Ayam vuccati bhikkhave sammâdi*.*t*.*t* *hi* (*Ma.-*1: 88). 

*Bhikkhus* .... what is *sammâditthi* ? (right understanding) *Bhikkhus* .... There is 

1. The knowledge in understanding the *Dukkha Saccâ* (Noble Truth of Suffering) 
1. The knowledge in understanding the *Samudaya Saccâ* (Noble Truth of Arising) the cause of *dukkha* (suffering) 
3. The knowledge in understanding the *Nirodha Saccâ* (cessation of suffering) 
3. The knowledge in understanding the *Magga Saccâ* (Noble Truth of Path), cessation of suffering which leads of *Nibbâna*.  *Bhikkhus* .... such a kind of knowledge is the 

`      `*Sammâdi*.*t*. *thi ñâ*.*n* *a* (*Ma*.-1: 88; *Mahâsatipathânasuttan*). 

Relevant to the above *desanâs* there are *Catusaccasammâdithi*, four *Sammâdithi*  *ñâna* (Four kinds of knowledge of rig..h t understanding).  This knowledge is referred to as *Pa*.*c* *cakkha ñâna* (the practical knowledge).  In this *suttan* only those who know and see by virtue of *Pa*.*c* *cekkha ñâna* are the ones qualified for *jânato* = he who knows, *passato* = he who sees.  . 

1. The five aggregates as the object of grasping 
1. Their impermanent nature 
1. The nature of their disappearance 

The preaching has been made of the Noble Path and Fruition, where factors of *âsava* have ceased, for those who know and see the above three by means of their practi- cal knowledge.  

Hence, those seeking cessation of the cause of *âsava* (cankers), the *Ariya Magga* (the Noble Path) should first try to see the following three penetratively through practical  knowledge, called *Sammâditthi ñân*. *a* (the knowledge of right understanding): 

1. The five aggregates as the object of grasping 
1. Their impermanent nature 
1. The nature of their disappearance 

It must be noted that one should first try to be able to know and see penetratively through the right understanding, ( as mentioned above) called practical knowledge, the object one is after. 

Now once again the five aggregates as the object of grasping, their impermanent  nature the nature of their disappearance, will be explained one by one. 

**What *Upâdânakkhandhâ* Is** 

**The five aggregates as the object of grasping** 

*Y*.*a* *m kañci bhik*. *khave rû*.*p* *am*.  *atîtânâ*.*g* *atapa*.*c* *cuppanam*.  *ijjhattam*.  *vâ bahiddhâ vâ olârikam vâ*.*  *sukh*.*u* *mam vâ hînam vâ panîtam vâ yam* .*d* *ure santike vâ sâsavum*  

*upâdâniyam, yam vuccati rûpupâdânakkhandho* (*Sam*.-2: 39; *Khandhsuttan*). 

With *tahnâ ditthi* (wrong understanding), whence *âsava* factors (resident in the 31 planes) arise , the clinging like “I”, “mine” -- including 

1. All the *rûpa* (material factors) of the past 
1. All the *rûpa* factors of the future 
1. All the *rûpa* factors of the present 
1. All the internal *rûpa* factors  
1. All the external *rûpa* factors  
1. All the gross *rûpa* factors 
1. All the delicate *sukhuma rûpa* factors 
1. All the inferior quality *hina rûpa* factors 
1. All the Noble *pan*. *îta rûpa* 
10. All the *dhûra rûpa* (away from the knowledge of the meditating yogi) 
10. All the *santika rûpa* (close to the knowledge of the meditating yogi). 

All the *rûpas* (material bodies) existing on the basis of these 11 characters are the *rûpupâdânakkhandhâ* (material body as the object of grasping). 

expatiatSeidm (i*S*la*a*r*m*l.y .- e 2a:c 3h9 o)f.  the following has to be under *rûpupâdânakkhandhâ* has been  

Eleven kinds of *vedanâ* factors as *vedanupâdânakkhandhâ* (suffering as the object of grasping), 11 kinds of *saññâ* factors as *saññupâdânakkhandhâ* (cognition as the object of grasping), 11 kinds of *Cetasika sankhâra* (impermanent mental concomitants) factors as *sankhârûpakkhandhâ* ( mental concomitants as the object of grasping), 11 kinds of  *viññâna* factors as *viññupâdânakkhandhâ* (perception as the object of grasping). 

Therefore, as in the above-mentioned *Upanisa sutta desanâ* where *tahnâ* (defile- 

ment), *ditthi* (error or wrong view) the root of *âsava*, such as “I”, “mine”, which are based on the 11 characters called *rûpânakkhandhâ*, the Buddha admonished 

1. *Iti rûpam* =  this is *rûpa* (corporeality or material body) 
1. *Iti vedanâ* =  this is *vedanâ* (suffering) 
1. *Iti saññâ*  =  this is *saññâ* (perception) 
1. *Iti* *sankhâra* =  this is *sankhâra* (impermanence) 
1. *Iti* *viññânam*.*   =  this is *viññânam*.  (modes of cognition) 

In admonishing so, the question is which kind of knowledge did the Buddha refer  to in ‘this is *rûpa*; this is *vedanâ*; this is *saññâ*; these are impermanent *cetasika* ? 

The answer to the above is as follows. 

***Iti rûpam -- Iti vedanâ*** 

- .  .  .  .  . 

*Tattha **iti rûp**anti idam rûpam, ettakam rûpam, i*.*t* *o uddham rûpam natthîti ruppanasa bhâvañceva bhûtupâdâyabhedañca âdim katvâ lakkhana rasa* 

*paccupatthana pada thânavasena anavasesarûpapariggaho vutto*.  “R.”* 

***Iti vedanâ**tiâdisupi ayam vedanâ, ettakâ vedanâ, ito uddham vedanâ natti. ayam saññâ*.  *Ime sankhâra*. *Idam viññânam*,  *ettakam viññânam*, *ito uddham viññânam natthîti vedayita-sañcânanaabhisankhârana-vijânanasabhâvañceva  sukhâdi-rûpasññâdi-phassâ- di-cakkhuviññânâdibhedañca âdim katvâ lakkhana-rasa-paccuppatthâna-padatthânava- sena anavasesavedanâ-saññâ-sankhâra-viññânâpariggaho vutto* (*Di.ttha-*2: 53; 273). 

***Iti rûpa**nti ettha **iti**-saddo idam-saddena-sammânutthoti adhippâyenâha* - “***idam rûpan**ti. Tayidam sarûpaggahabhâvato anavasesapariyâdânam hotîti âha “**ettam rûpam, na ito pram rûpam attî**ti*.  ***Itî**ti vâ pakâratte nipâto, tassamâ “**iti rûpa**nti Iminâ bhûtu- pâdâdivasena  attako  rûpassa  pabhedo,  tena  sadhim  rûpam  anvasesato  paruyâdiyisvâ dasseti.   **Sabhâvato**ti  ruppanasabhâvato,  cakkhâdi  vunnâdi  sabhâvato  ca. **Vedanâdîsupî**ti  etta  --  “ayam  vedanâ,  ettakâ  vedanâ,  na  ito  pram  vedanâ  attî”ti sabhâvato vedanam pajânâtî”ti âdinâ, **sabhâvato**tica “anubhavanasabhâvato, sâtâdisa- bhâvato câ”ti evamâdinâ yojetabbam* (*Dî*.-*Tî*.-2: 320). 

`    `**Question**.  The Lord Buddha instructed practicing bodies to repeatedly contemplate, culture and analyze the five aggregates as object of grasping and their nature, such as - this is *rûpa*, this is *vedanâ*, this is *saññâ*, these are *cetasika sankhâra*, this is *viññâna* - by means of *sammâditthi ñân*. *a* (right understanding).  They the question may be asked as to how the practicing yogis would know the five aggregates as the object of grasping, and  how would they concentrate by means of the *sammâditthi ñân*. *a*. 

**Answer**.  The following is the answer to the above. 

1. This is the *rûpa* (material body); this much is the nature of *rûpa*, no more no less than  this.   It  is  so  because  of  the  causes  such  as  hot,  cold,  etc.,  *rûpasantati* (continuity  of   the  material  body)  of  the  past  =  possesses  dissimilar  to  the *rûpasantati*  of  the  future  =  processes  occurring  in  various  forms  called *rûppanasibhâva* (the character of the *rûpa*) = assume the nature of impermanence  

(general character common to all material qualities), twenty-eight sensitive material qualities  and tangibility beginning with which *lakkhana*-*rasa*-*piccupathan-padatthan* 

` `(character-taste-reappearance-approximate  cause),  by  which  material  qualities  are 

completely deduced by means of knowledge of right understanding = must concentrate to attain complete realization is meant here. 

In “this is *vedanâ*, etc.” too 

2. This is *vedanâ*, this much is the *vedanâ*, no more *vedanâ* beyond this. 
2. This is *saññâ* (physical cognition). R. 
2. These are *cetasika* and *sankhâra*.  R. 
2. This is *viññâna*, this much is the *viññâna*, no more *viññâna* beyond this. 
2. Nature of sensation of *vedanakkhandhâ* (suffering as object of grasping) 
2. Nature of sensation of *saññakkhandhâ* (physical mode of cognition) 
2. The nature of the cause and resultant formation of *sankhâranakkhandhâ*  (imper- manent material qualities) 
2. Each of the  *sankhâranakkhandhâ* causes is capable of respective resultant formation 
2. Recognition of different sensations of *vedanakkhandhâ* as suffering (*vedanâ*) and  

`       `*sukha* (mentally pleasurable) etc. 

3. Recognition of different sensations of *saññakkhandhâ* as *rûpa* and *saññâ* etc. 
3. Recognition of different sensations of *sankhârakkhandhâ* as *phassa* (touch) and  

`       `*cetanâ* (volition) etc. 

5. Recognition of different sensations of *viññâkkhandhâ* as *cakkhu* (consciousness by 

`       `way of sight) and *viññañ* (material consciousness). 

Beginning with these and the power of ***lakkhana, rasa, paccupatthan, padatthan*** the *saññâ, vedanâ, sankhâra*, and *viññâna* are instructed to be separately analyzed and cultured.  What it meant is that phenomena of *saññâ, vedanâ, sankhâra* and *viññâna* (mind-element) are all to be completely known by the knowledge of *sammâditthi* (the  right understanding) = concentrate to understand (*Dî.-ttha*.-2-53). 

With reference to the explanations given by the above doctrines the practicing yogi has to  

1. *Bhûtarûpa* (formed corporeality), *upâdârûpa* (derived corporeality) etc. of the 28 

species, *pathavî* (earth), *âpo* (water), *tejo* (fire), *vâyo* (air) and each of their respective *lakkhana*  (character),  *rasa*  (taste),  *paccuppatthan*  (reappearance),  and  *padatthan* (proximate cause) 

2. *Sukhavedanâ* (mentally pleasurable suffering),  *dukkhavedanâ* (painful suffering), 

*somanassa* (mental ease), *domanassa* (mentally painful), *upekkhâvedanâ* (suffering due to  equanimity)  and  each  of  their  respective  *lakkhana*  (character),  *rasa*  (taste), *paccuppatthan* (reappearance), and *padatthan* (proximate cause), 

3. *Rûpasaññâ, saddasaññâ, gandhasaññâ, rasasaññâ, pholapphasaññâ, dhammasaññâ* 

and  each  of  their  respective  *lakkhana*  (character),  *rasa*  (taste),  *paccuppatthan* (reappearance), and *padatthan* (proximate cause), 

\3.  *Phassa, cetanâ, ekaggatâ, jîvita, manasikâra* (intension), etc., 50 groups of *cetasika* as species included in *sankhâra* as object of grasping, and each of their  respective  *lakkhana*  (character),  *rasa*  (taste),  *paccuppatthan* (reappearance), and *padatthan* (proximate cause), 

\5.   *Cakkhuviññâna* (consciousness by way of sight), *sotaviññâna* (consciousness by way of hearing), *ghânaviññâna* (consciousness by way of smell), *jihvâviññâna* (cons- ciousness by way of smell), *manoviññâna* (consciousness by way of mind) etc., and each 

of their respective *lakkhana* (character), *rasa* (taste), *paccuppatt*.*h*. *an* (reappearance), and  *padatthan* (proximate cause). 

The  practicing  individual  has  to  concentrate  and  culture  these  by  means  of *sammâditthi ñâna* to see and know the object penetratively.  Only known and seen this  way, such as 

1. This is *rûpa*, 
1. This is *vedanâ*, 
1. This is *saññâ,* 
1. These are *sankhâra*, 
1. This is *viññân*. *a* 

Only then the *yogâvacara* is said to know and see.  In doing so 

*Cakkhumâ viya cakkhun*. *â rûpani* (*Sam*. *.-t*.*t*. *ha*.- 2: 49), 

*Rdaûspsâannia vmi*.*y*  (*aS caam*.*k* .*k* .*Th* *îu*.-*v* *i*2*ñ*:*ñ* 6*â*3*n*)*e*.*n*  *a rûpâdîni tesam*.*  *ca samudayodike paccekkhe katvâ*  

In accordance with explanations given in  Commentaries and Subcommentaries, as a man sees material objects by *cakkhu ñân*. *a* so also a meditator, through the help of light shed by concentration and cultivation,   cultivate these *dhamma* penetratively and  

maintained by *sammâdi*.*t*.*t* *hi ñân*. *a* called *paccekkha ñân*. *a*. 

Only knowing and seeing this way can the Noble Path and Fruit, where all the âsava ceased to exist, be attained.  In so admonishing, the Buddha referred not to those who do not  know and see  penetratively by  *sammâdi*.*t*.*t* *hi ñâna*  to eradicate all the factors  of *âsava* to attain the Path leading to *Ariya Magga*. 

Following these doctrines, with due respect, this treatise titled  “*NIBBANAGAMINIPAT*. *IPADÃ*” was written to include 

1. Meditation  and  cultivation  on  the  *rûpupâdhânakkhandha*  (28  species  of  material qualities), included in the *upâdânakkhandhâ* to attain *parama*.*t*.*t* *ha* (the ultimate truth) by 

.. 

means of knowledge of right understanding (*sammâditthi ñâna*) referred to as *paccekkha ñâna*.  How this is cultured is given in the  Meditation Exercise on Corporeality.  (see Vol. I). 

2. Included in the *Pañcuppâdânakkhandhâ* (the five aggregates as object of grasping) are *vedanapâdânakkhandhâ* (feeling as object of grasping), *saññupâdânakkhandhâ* (percep- tion as object of grasping), *sankhârûpekkhandhâ* (*sankhâra* as object of grasping) and *viñânupâdânakkhandhâ* (consciousness as object of grasping).  These are meditated by *sammâditthi ñâna* called *paccakkhan ñâna* to attain the knowledge of *paramattha ñâna*. 
2. This is referred to as  Meditation Exercise on *Nâma*.  This section is presented in Vol. II. 

`     `The nature of *rûpa* (material phenomenon), *nâma* (mental phenomenon) and 

elements of *paramattha* (ultimate truth) are included in the *Pañcuppâdânakkhandhâ* (the five aggregates as object of grasping).  They are individually analyzed, concentrated and  cultivated by the power of *paccupathan* and *padathan*, and *sammâditthi ñâna* called  *paccakkhan ñâna*.    This is referred to as *Lakkhanâdicatukka* (see Vol. IV). 

In  continuation, the second part of  *Upanisasuttan*  given  above*-- Iti rûpassa*  *samudayo*. R.  *Iti vinñânassa samudayo*--will further be explained. 

***Iti rûpassa samudayo.* R*. Iti viñânassa samudayo ....*** 

***Iti rûpassa samudayo**ti evum avijjâsamudayadivasena pañcahâkârehi rûpassa  samudayo* (*Dî-Ttha*.-2: 373). 

*Tassa vitthâro “avijjâsamudayo rûpasamudayo, tahnâsamudayo rûpasamudato, kammasamudayo rûpasamudayo, âhârasamudatyo rûpasamudayoti, nibbattilakkhanan passantopi rûpakkhandhassa udayam passatîti* (*Patisam.* 53)*.*  

` `*Evum veditabbo* (*Ti.-Ttha.-*2: 53). 

***Avijjâsamudayâ**ti avijjâya uppâdâ, atthibhâvâti attho*.  *Nirodhanirodhî hi uppâdo atthibhâvacakopi hoti, tassamâ pûtimabhavasiddhâya avijjâya sati imassamim bhave rûpasamudayo.  Rûpassa uppâdo hotîti attho.* “***Tahnâsamudayo***”*tiâdisuppi  eseva nayo.  **Ãhârasamudayo**ti ittha pana pavattipacceyesu kabalikârâhârassa balavatâya so eva gahito.  Tassamim pana gahite pavattipacceyatâsamaññena utucittâni gahitâneva huntîti catusamutthânikarûpassa paccayo uddayadassanm vibhâvitamevâti datthabbam.*  **“*Nibbattilakkhanan*”***tiâdinâ kâlavasena udayadassanamâha. Tattha **nibbattilak- khanant**i rûpassa uppâdasankhâtam sañkhatalakkhanam. **Passantopî**ti na kevalam paccayasamudayameva. Ha kho khanato udayam passantopi.  Addhânavasena hi* 

*patthamam udayam passitvâ thitio punna santativasena disvâ anukkamena khanavasena* 

` `*passati* (*Dî.tî.-*3-53: 54). 

***Nibbattilakkhanan**ti addhâ-santati-khanavasena rûpassa uppâdam, uppâdoyeva  sankhatalakkhanattâ lakkhananti ca vutto* (*Patisam.- Tha.-* 1: 235). 

In the opening of the Commentaries and Subcommentaries with reference to the above  *Patisambhidâmagga*   the object of meditating* instructions  such as ***Iti rûpassa**  **samudayo*** is as given below. 

**Contemplation on the *Samudaya* of *Rûpakkhandhâ*** 

1. Because of *avijjâ* (ignorance) the material quality born of *kamma* is formed. 
2. Because of *tahnâ* (craving) the material quality born of *kamma* is formed. 
2. Because of *upâdan* (grasping) the material quality born of *kamma* is formed. 
2. Because of *sankhâra* (action of mind) the material quality born of *kamma* is formed 
2. Because of *kamma* (action) the material quality born of *kamma* is formed. 
* The nature of formation of material quality born of *kamma*. 
6. Because of *citta* (mind/thought) the material quality born of mind is formed. 
* The nature of formation of material quality born of mind. 
7. Because of *utu* (physical change) material quality born of utu is formed. 

•  The nature of formation of material quality of born of *utu*. 

8. Because of *âhâra* (nutrition/food) material quality of born of *âhâra* is formed. 
* The nature of formation of material quality born of âhâra. 

These are the objects of concentration.  A broader treatment on this object of concentration is made, Vol. V, in section on *Vipassanâ*, *and Samudayadhammânupassî* in Method of Concentration on *Udayabbaya* in a broader sense. 

In the contemplation—because of ignorance material quality born of *kamma* is formed—the distinct causal factor = due to distinct cause a distinct result occurs should be  concentrated.   This  contemplating  phenomenon  is  the  *paccayato  udayadassana*  = nature of *samudaya* by way of cause = contemplating on the result due to the cause.  Concentrating on the nature of the formation of material quality born of *kamma* and that born  of  consciousness  is  the  causal  relationship  called  *khanato  udayadassan*  = concentrating for a moment on the nature of *samudaya* = concentrating on the formation momentarily. 

In this contemplation too — 

*Cakkhumâ viya cakkhunâ rûpâni* ..... (*Sam. Tha*.- 2: 49). 

*Rûpâni viya cakkhuvinânena rûpâdîni tesam ca samudayâdike paccakhhe katvâ  dassanam* (*Sam. Tî.-* 2: 63*)*. 

According  to  these  teaching—like  a  man  seeing  material  bodies  by  physical cognition so should a practicing individual (*yogâvacara* or a meditator) be contemplating on these factors by the  knowledge through which these are  appreciated penetratively via  *sammâditthi ñâna* called *paccekkha ñâna*. 

To be able to do so a meditator should have cultivated the following: 

1. The respective causes of *avijjâ* (ignorance), *tahnâ* (craving)*, upâdan* (grasping)*,* 

*sankhâra* (mental action), *kamma* (action) etc. 

2. *Rûpa*-*vedanâ*-*saññâ*-*sankhâra*-*viññâna*, the resultant factors. 
2. Because these causes, the respectively results distinctly occur, and the nature of 

cause-effect correlation. 

(These belong to the knowledge of *Nâma-rûpapariccheda* and of *Paccayapriggaha*) (insight knowledge or analytical knowledge of mind and matter, and the knowledge of  causal relationship). 

Only  those  *yogâvacara*  (meditators)  who  have  cultivated  these  knowledge  of *Nâmarûpapariccheda*  and  of  *Paccayapriggaha*  will  be  able  to  concentrate  on  the *sammudayadhammânupassi* (repeated recollection of *sammudaya dhamma*).  Therefore, this meditation has been explained by the Sayadaw in section on *Udayabbaya ñâna* by 

` `Commentary of *Visuddhi Magga* (see *Visuddhi* - 2: 266). 

In this contemplation *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdân, sankhâra, kamma* are the real causes of  the  present  *rûpa*  and  *nâma*  factors  of  the  five  *upâdânakkhandhâ*,  included  in  the *vipâkâ* *vatta* (function of the effect of one’s actions). As to when these causes made their appearance, the following extracts from *Patisamb*. *hidâ Magga* will give the answer. 

**Extracts from *Pa*.*t* *isambhidâ Magga*** 

**The Past Five Causes** 

*Purimakammabhavassamem*.   *moho  avijjâ,  âyûhanâ  sankhârâ,  nikanti  thnâ, mupeamg*.  *aidmhaan paam*.*t*.  *i* *usapmâddâhniyaâm* .*p* *, accectaanyââ*  *b*(*Phaavtiostaim im.*-5*e* 0*p*)*a*. *ñca dhammâ Purimakammabhavassa-* 

*Tattha*, ***purimakammabhavassamen**ti purime kammabhave, atîtajâtiyam kamma- bhave kriyamâneti attho* (*Abhi.-ttha.-*182; *Visuddhi*-2: 214). 

During previous life, when *kamma* (a cause), called *kammabhava* (active func- tioning of life in relation to the past) was cultivated 

1. Nature  of  the  wrong  notion  of  the  Four  Noble  Truth,  and  of  male,  female, 

individuality, sentient being, human being, *devâ*, brahmâ etc., are all *avijjâ* (ignorance). 

2. Human life = man’s material body = *devâ*s' material body, and the factors that cause 

appearance of these, *kusala* (good deed), *akusala* (bad deed) (done with *mettâ* or without *mettâ*) are all *sankhâra* (arising, action of mind). 

3. Human life, life of *devâ* etc., and the nature of attachment to these material *kamma* 

are all *tahnâ*. 

4. The nature of attachment mentally upon these life and material *karma* all belong to 

*upâdan* (derived from grasping). 

5. Such *kuso cetanâ* (meritorious action) or *akuso cetanâ* (non-meritorious action) all 

mean *bhava* (rounds of rebirth). 

`         `(*Kammabhava* = *kamma*, action.  In concentrating on *vipassanâ* (insight), effort must be made of  *cetanâ*(volition).   In concentrating on  cause-effect  correlation,  effort   must  be made of *kammasatti* (potent action) = *kamma* (action). 

In this way, if *kammabhava* (active life) of the past life = if *kamma* is distinctly  present, these five that have appeared =  that are making their appearance then these five 

` `*dhamma* are the five corporeality of the rebirth in the present life (*Patisam*.-50). 

In these five causal factors *avijjâ*, *tahnâ* and *upâdan* are the consequences of craving.  *Sankhâra* and *kamma* are the consequences of the action.  These are the five past causes.  Because of these five past causes the following five present results have  appeared.  These results are the *vipâkavatta* (function of effect of one’s action). 

**The Five Species of Present Resultants** 

*Idha patisandhi viññânam*, *okkanti nâmarûpam, pasâdo âyatanam*, *phattho phasso, vedayitam vedanâ,  ime pañca dhammâ  idhûpapattibhvassamem  purekatassa kammassa paccayâ* (*Patisam.*-50). 

In the present life 

1. The nature of connection, liability to connect, of a past life with the present one,  

the  *patisandhe  citta*  (rebirth  consciousness),  or  *vipâka  citta*  (consciousness  of consequences of one’s action) is the *viññâna* (mental cognition). 

2. The nature of entrance into mother’s womb is the *nâmarûpa* (mind and matter). 
2. *Pasâda*  (clearness  or  clarity)  like  *cakkhu*  (sight)  etc.  are  the  *sal*.*â*  *yatana*  (sense 

objects). 

4. Nature of contact as object or liable to make contact is the *phassa* (Contact). 
4. The nature of or factor of feeling of the object as concentration is the *vedanâ* 
\*
` `(suffering). 

In this way in the present life if there is *jâti* (birth), called the *upapattibhava* (resultant  way  of  next  life),  the  these  five  *dhamma*,  which  have  appeared  and  the appearance completed, are the results of the *kamma* cultivated during previous existence (*Patisam*.-50). 

**The Five Species of The Present Causes** 

*Idha  paripakkattâ  âyatanânam  moho  avijjâ,  âyûhanâ  sankhâra, nikanti  tahnâ,   upagamanam upâdânam, cetanâ bhavoti ime pañca  ghammâ idha  kammabhavassamem* 

` `*âyattem patisandhiyâ paccayâ*  (*Patisam.-*50). 

In the present existence, due to maturity of *Ãyatana* (groups of sense objects) 

1. The nature ignorance of the Four *Sacca* (the Four Noble Truth), wrong concept of  

being male, female, individuality, animals, human, celestial *devâ*s, brahmmâ etc. are all *avijjâ*. 

2. The appearance of five corporeality like human life = material human body, life of 

celestial being = material body of celestial being, etc. and the factors, which make these appear,  such as *kusala* and *akusala* (actions meritorious or not) are all *sankhâra*. 

3. The nature of clinging to these material *kamma* (material bodies) are all tahnâ 

(desire). 

4. The nature of attachment mentally to such *kamma* bodies and *kammavatthu* is 

*upâdan* (grasping). 

5. Such and such  *kusocetanâ* (meritorious volition)  or  *akusocetanâ* (non-meritorious  

volition) means *bhava* (life/ a form of rebirth).  (*Kammabhava* =  *kamma*). 

In this way if these five categories are present as *kammabhava* (sensual existence)  in the existing life, there occurs rebirth as the resultant (*Patisam*.-50). 

[Note.  In the present life incident *âyatana* mind is enjoyable, but mostly unable to create a *bhava* resulting from effort to produce a new life during preceding one.  So the Buddha  preached stressing the point of maturity of *âyatana dhamma*]. 

**The Five Future Resultants** 

*Ãyatem patisantdhi viññânam, okkanti nâmarûpam, pasâ âyatanam, phuttho phasso vedayitam vedanâ, ime pañca dhammâ upapattibhavassamem idhakatassa kammassa  paccayâ* (*Patisam.-*51). 

1. Rebirth consciousness, in other words rebirth consciousness, which has the nature 

or tendency to again relate a present life with a previous one is the mental factor. 

2. The nature of formation as in conception in the maternal interior is the *nâma*-*rûpa* 

mind and material factor). 

3. Visual feeling is the *sa*.*l* *âyatana* (sense as object) 
3. Nature of contact as object or liable to make contact is the *phassa* (Contact). 
3. Nature of enjoyment in senses, and categories of sensation is the *vednâ* (suffering). 

Therefore  in  future  life,  if  there  is *upapattibhava*  (resultant  way  of  next  life) called *jâti* (birth), these five categories would be derived from the previously cultivated *kamma* (*Patisam*.-51). 

**Classification of Period** 

In this *paticcasamuppâda* (cause-result relationship) *desanâ* are 12  categories:  *avijjâ,  sankhâra,  viññâna,  nâma-rûpa,   sal*. *âyatana,  phassa, vedanâ,  tahnâ, upâdan,  bhava, jâti, jaramarana*. 

These 12 categories, as instructed by  *Patisambhidâmagga* (Analysis of Path in *Pâli*)  the period have been recognized by  *Abhidhammatthâ Sañgâha*  (the collection of 

` `doctrines) as given below. 

*Avijjâ sankhâra atîto addhâ,  jâti,  jarâmaranam anâgato addhâ,  macche attha  paccuppanno addhâ* (*Abhiddhammattha sañgaha* - 132). 

*Avijjâ* and *sankhâra* are the categories of the long past period.  *Jâti* (rebirth), *jarâmarana* (decay, death) are the categories of the period to come (future period).  In between these two are *viññâna, nâma-rûpa, salâyatana, phassa, vedanâ, tahnâ, upâdan,* *bhava*  (= *kammabhava*),  the categories of the present period  (*Abhiddhammattha  Sañgaha* - 132). 

The 12 factors of *Paticcasamupâda* are classified by the periods with the present existence placed midway between the past and the future.  This is the doctrine indicating the  repetition  and  correlation  between  each  of  the  12  factors  of  *Paticcasamupâda*.  Similarly  the  contemplation  can  be  made,  as  much  as  possible,  the  repetition  and correlation between on the individual factors of the *Paticcasamupâda* by concentrating  the mind on the past and future *bhava*.   

*Atîtepi paccayâ ceva paccayasamuppannadhammâ ca, anâgatepi etarahipi  paccayâ* *ceva paccayasamuppannadhammâ ca* (*Abhi.-Ttha*.- 2: 242). 

1. In the past too, there are only the phenomena of causes and results. 
1. In the future too, there are only the phenomena of causes and results. 
1. In the present too, there are only the phenomena of causes and results.  

Relevant to the explanation given by the above *Sammohavinodanî Athhakathâ* (Commentary on Dispelling of being Infatuated), to know that on the past also there are  factors of cause and result, the cause and result of two or three previous lives should  be cultivated. 

***Ekadesato jânitabbam*** 

*Vipassakena pana kammantarañca ekadesato jânitabbam* (*Visuddhi* - 2: 237). 

***Ekadesato jânitabbam** anavasesato jâtitum na sakkâ avisayattâ*.  *Sabbena sabbam  ajânane paccayapriggaho na paripûrati* (*Mahâdî -* 2: 380). 

`      `*Ditthadhammavedanîyakam* = action fruitful in the present life, *upapajjavedanîyakam* 

- action that is going to be fruitful in the second life, *aprapriyavedanîyakam* = action that will be  fruitful  from third life to the attainment of  *Nibbâna* etc.  *Kamma* (action) are of  various kinds.  Among them 

A  meditator  exercising  on  *vipassanâ*  (insight)  should  know  in  part  with considerable  strength  or  weakness  in  *kamma*  called  *kammantara*  (*kamma*-formation); *kamma* of different categories, of inferior quality or superior quality results of actions, cleanliness or not of mental actions so-called mental formation.  These are *ekadesa* = in part which are to be mentally cultivated.  The disciples are unable to attain complete accomplishment  of  these  *kammantara*  and  *vipâkkantara*  (Fruit-formation).   It  is  so because these are not the affairs of  *sâvakas* (disciples),  but are only of  the omniscience  and perfectly enlightened ones, *Sabbññañusammâsambhuddha*. 

If the *kammantara* and *vipâkkantara* (factors of cause and results of *kamma*), then the knowledge of acquiring the cause or result referred to as *paccayapariggaha* *ñâna* (knowledge based on acquisition) will never be accomplished (*Visuddhi*- 2 - 237; *Mahâdî*  -2 - 380). 

A *yogâvacara* individual (a meditator) meditating on the *kamma* and its results by *sammâditthi ñâna* on the *kamma* and its results by *sammâditthi ñâna*, especially on the fact that due to cultivation surrounded by *avijjâ, tahnâ* and *upâdan* in the past, the rebirth nâma-rûpa, the resultant *vipâka* of the present are formed.  In such way of cultivation, the question arises  as to  should one be contended with  what has been  acquired  by hearsay  from one’s teachers?  The answer follows. 

*Ñânasama*. *ñgî puggalo cakkhumâ viya cakkhunâ rûpâni, ñânena viv*.*a* *te dhamm*. *e* *passati*  (*Sam.-ttha*.-2:49). 

***Jânato**ti vâ vattvâ na jânanam anussavâkâraprivitakkamattavasena idhâdhippetam, atha kho rûpâni viya cakkhuviñânena rûpâdîni tesan ca samudayâdike paccakkhe katvâ  dassananti vibhâvetum “**passato**”ti vattanti evum vâ ettha attho (Sam.-T*. *î*.-2: 63). 

Satisfaction with the knowledge of hearsay, heard and taught by the teacher is what  you  know  =  hearsay  knowledge  and  is  unacceptable  here.   The  fact  that  just knowing by thinking on the basis of the prevailing state (or condition), such as “This could be it.  This could it”, is just your own knowledge acquired through thinking.  Such a knowledge also is not acceptable here.  Indeed, what is acceptable is that just as seeing a material body through the physical eye, so should a *yogâvacara* (meditator) see by the light  of  *vipassanâ*  insight  called  *paccaya  pariggaha*  knowledge.   By  means  of  the *vipassanâ* insight, the *upâdâna-kkhandhâ* (the five-fold clinging to the existence), the nature of the origin of *upâdâna-kkhandhâ*, the nature of its ceasing etc., should be known penetratively by the right understanding called the practical knowledge.  Here such a  knowledge as *dassana* = knowledge, sight, only is acceptable (*Sam.-Tha*.-2-49; *Sam.-tî*.- 2-63). 

**Could We Know and See This Way** 

As a disciple, could a meditator know, penetratively by insight knowledge, the categories of action of mind cultivated with *avijjâ, tahnâ*, and *upâdan* of the past rebirth material, cause the derived resultant of the present appear?  It is a question made by those of good deed would like to know the answer.  If you are not contended, then continue on the following. 

***Nibbatti Passitabbâ*** 

Those *yogâvacara* individuals who have acquired analytical knowledge of mind and matter and familiar with the knowledge analytically, should contemplate concentra- ting on the *nâma-rûpa,* *sasnkhâra dhamma* and their causes with emphasis on the three properties  of  existing  things.   In  so  exercising  the  *vipassanâ*  Patisambhidâmagga instructed  the  concentration  to  be  made  so  that  *nibbatti  lakkhanâ*  (properties  of formation) is apprehended in your mind  (*Patisam*. - 53: 54).   With regard to the  *nibbatti lakkhanâ*  

Commentary on *Patisambidâ* give the following three expiations. 

***Nibbatti lakkhanan**ti addhâ-santati-khanavasena rûpassa uppâdam, uppâdoyeva  sañkhatalakkhanatta lakkhananti ca vutto (Patisam*-*Tha*- 1: 235).*** 

*Nibbatti* is of three categories: *addhânibbatti*, *santatinibbatti*, *khananibbatti*.  

1. In a lifetime from birth to death the properties of *rûpa* and *nâma* (the material and 

mental properties) are the groups of the present factors.  The nature of appearance of these properties is the *addhânibbatti* (present formations). 

2. The material and mental properties within a series of form and of mind are the 

groups of the present.  The nature of formation of these true factors of the present is the ***santatinibbatti*** (continuity of forms). 

3. Three species of *khana* (moment) such as *upâda* (the arising) - *thî* (the static) - *bhin* 

(perishing  away),  which  are  included  in  the  mind  and  material  qualities,  are  the categories of the *khana* (momentary) present.  The nature of formation of the *khana*- present ***khananibbatti***. 

4. Furthermore, Commentary  on *Visuddhimagga* recommended that contemplation 

must be made of the appearance again and again of *kammajarûpa*, derived from *kamma*, from birth*khana*.  This is ***kammatanibbatti***.  Similarly the formation of thought moment due  to  mind,  of  physical  change,  and  of  food  are  to  be  known  and  visualized  by concentration  through  *vipassanâ  ñâna*.   Characteristic  of  *nibbatti*  (material  body), relentless  formation  and  destruction,  and  their  character  formation  called *nibbattilakkhana* (character of rising) should be cultured by *vipassanâ* method of concen- tration (*Visuddhi* -2-249-252). 

5. Again, through the *kamma* (action) of the long past life from rebirth mid to the 

originof the phenomenon of mind, the features of *nibbatti* during formation, coincidence  of mind doors, the causes due to which phenomena of mind start to appear—the features of *nibbatti*—are to be contemplated by *vipassanâ* method (*Visuddhi* -2: 252-253). 

**A Brief Instruction to Meditation** 

... *kâlena rûpam sammatitabbam, kâlena arûpam.  Rûpam sammasantena rûpassa nibbatti passitabbâ.  Seyathidam--idam rûpam nâma kammâdivasena catûhi kâranehi nibbatti.  Tattha sabbesam sattânam rûpam nibbattamânam patthamam kammato*  

*nibbatti.  Patisandhikkhaneyeva hi gabbhaseyakânam tâva tisantivasena vatthu-kâya-*

*bhâvadassakasankhâtâni temsarûpâni nibbattanti, tâni ca kho patisandhicittassa uppâdakkhaneyeva.  Yathâ ca uppâdakkhane, tathâ thitikkhanepi bhangakkhanepi ...*  (*Visuddhi* 2: 248-249)*  

*Yathâ ca rûpam sammasantena rûpassa, evum arûoam sammasantenapi arûpassa nibbatti passitabbâ.  Sâ ca kho ekâsîti lokiyacittuppâdavasena.  Seyathidam -- idahñi arûpam nâma pûrimabheva âyûhitakammavasena patisamdhiyam tâva ekûnavîsati- cittuppâdappabhedam nibbatti*  (*Visuddhi-*2: 252). 

*Nibbatti passitabbâ* — from the time of rebirth to throughout life time formation material and mind called the nature of *nibbatti* is to be contemplated — means contem- plation should be made by always following the doctrines by knowledge of *anumâna* = inference should be contemplated.  Following such an incessant concentration, meditation becomes impinged on the mind = concentration may also become fruitful by contemplat- ing practical knowledge (*Mahâtî*-2: 399). 

This knowledge of inference is the one formed during the past.  A disciple should not be contended  with this  knowledge only.   In fact contemplation  should be  made to 

` `attain the next step, *paccakkha ñâna* (the practical knowledge). 

This  means  that  if  a  meditator,  who  has  attained  *sammâ  ditthi*  (the  right understanding), starts to exercise concentration on the material body, the nature of each of the Four Great Elements are to be concentrated 

1. The nature of hardness of the Earth-element. 
1. The nature of flowing and cohesion of the Water-element. 
1. The nature of the hotness of the Fire-element. 
1. The nature of the support of the Air-element. 

Suppose natural phenomena of the Four Great Elements are cultured to start with.  As soon as they are cultivated, it will be very hard to concentrate and culture on the material features and the natural phenomena of each element of the Four Great Element by penetrative mental quality. These individual phenomena, called the nature of ultimate reality can,  however,  be cultured if the meditator is of the status of  *Ariyas*  (the Noble  Ones) like the Venerable *Sariputtara* and the Venerable *Bahiyadârûciriya*. 

Within  each  group  of  *rûpakalâpa*  (a  combination  of  material  bodies)  are  the natural phenomena of their own of the Four Great Elements.  Following the instructions given by the doctrines, the natural phenomena, such as the nature of hardness, flowing, hotness and support are to be exercised and cultured by the knowledge.  In doing so, the meditator,  whose  ñâna  (knowledge)  has  not  as  yet  arrived  at  knowing  the  natural phenomena of the Four Great Element called the *paramatta* (the ultimate truth) could still not split the bulk of such *rûpa* or the aggregates of material bodies (referred to as  *santatighana*  =  continuity  of  the  solid  mass,  *samûhaghana*  =  obligatory  solid  mass, *kiccaghana* = aggregated solid mass etc.).  Therefore, his *bhavanâ ñâna* (knowledge of meditation) can only be exercised in the field of *santatipaññatti* (notion of continuity of solid mass), *samûhapaññatti* (notion of obligatory solid mass) and *kiccapaññatti* (notion  of aggregated solid mass). 

These concepts (or notions), however, are the ones from which the *paramatta*, called the essence of element, can be derived.  It is a concept of *pathavî kasin*. *a* (circle of earth) perception derived from concentration on the circles of earth dispersed in the 10  

directions,  and  it  is  not  the  *paññatti*  (notion)  from  which  the  ultimate  reality  of  the element cannot be attained.  Nor it is the space-circle from which the ultimate reality of the elements cannot be derived. 

Since the perception of duration of the *santatipaññatti* are still lingering on him, the meditator has to be exercising on the nature of the Four Great Element, such as hardness, flowing, hotness and support.  While concentrating in this way, the knowledge of the mental culture is completely attained.  Only then are the material character of the individual groups of the Four Great Element, called the ultimate real element can pene- 

` `tratively be cultured.  (see Meditation on *Rûpa* for detail). 

Similarly when contemplation is made on the *nibbattilakkhanâ* (phenomenon of formation) too, the meditator should concentrate on the material and mental formation of rebirth due to the *kamma* of the past, also due to the past *kamma* the material and mental formations, included in *vipâkavatta*, occurring throughout the life time, the nature of arising of material and mental formation of rebirth (nature of *nibbatti*), if the *bhâvanâ ñâna* is still immature, the meditator could not cultivate at once.  According the Buddha’s desanâ  —  there  are  30  classes  of  *rûpa*  during  the  period  of  rebirth,  34  if  it  is *tihissomanassa*  (three-fold  mental  case)  —  by  power  of  *anumâna*  knowledge  which follows instructions in the doctrines, and the concentration is made by imagination.  But  the  exercise  should  be  continued  until  *paccakkhan  ñâna*  (practical  knowledge)  is acquired. 

In  practicing  by  *anumâna*  (inference),  at  a  time  when  *bhâvanâ  ñâna* is  till immature,  *rûpa-nâma*  are  cultivated  in  sequence directed  towards  the  rebirth phenomenon. Because  much  emphasis  was  made  on  mental  exercise  in  the field  of *paññatta*  all  along  the  *sansarâ*.   In  such  consciousness  are  included  the  mind-door impressions  called  conceptual  attention,  due  to  culture  of  which  images  of  these conceptions sometimes appear in a practicing *yogi* (*yogâvacara*).  These aggregates are 

due to present still of the concept of duration of compactness an..d.  the configuration.  These, however, are the ones from which the concept of essence of the element, referred to as the ultimate reality, can be derived.  Since the meditator still has this conceptual knowledge of the compactness, massive, etc., he has to continue exercise on the Four Great Element.  If successful, culture of mind and material qualities further can be made.  Every time the image of the concept appears, this method has to be applied.  If the exercise along this trend  and mental culture matured, then the phenomenon of form from its origin to mind and material of  rebirth  will  penetratively be  visualized  by mean of the  *sammâditthi ñâna*, called the practical knowledge. 

If the concentration is continued in this way, and the maturity of mental culture acquired surrounded by *avijjâ, tahnâ,* and *upâdam* and be cultivated by means of these *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdam* and *sankhâra*, mind and material of the rebirth, and the respective results of actions of mind and material, and the phenomena of *nibbatti* will be visualized. 

` `(see section *Paticca samuppâda* for more details). 

In this meditation by penetrative practical knowledge appearance of the respective results  of  mind  and  material  of  rebirth  *avijjâ,  tahnâ,  upâdam*  and  *sankhâra*  are  the respective  causes  are *Paccayato udayadassana* = method of contemplation on cause- result phenomenon of appearance of the mind and material formation, the phenomena of *upâda* by penetrative knowledge is the *khanato udayadassana* = contemplation on the  momentary formation.  (see section on *Udayabbayañâna* for more detail). 

**What Kind of Action Is It** 

In  concentrating so *Samyotta*, Commentary scriptures which describe *Upanisa suttan*  (*Sam.-Tha.-*2-49;  *Sam.Tî.-*2-63)  expounded  as  a  man  sees  different  kinds  of *rûpâyon* (visible material factors) by means of *cakkhu ñâna* (knowledge of sight), so should a practicing yogi see mental and material causes, *pacñcânakkhandhâ* (the Five Corporeality),  initiation  of  material  body  formation,  phenomenon  of  the  nature  of *nibbatti*, due to the causes such as *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdam* and *sankhâra* etc., difference of respective results of mental and material form of rebirth, the nature of *samudaya* should 

` `be seen penetratively by *sammâditthi ñâna* called *paccekkha ñâna.* 

Only if one knows and sees this way and only he who knows and sees this way, can *Magga Ñâna* (Path-Knowledge), where all the phenomena of *âsava* (the fetters) have  ceased, be attained is what the Buddha has expatiated in *Upani* *Suttan*.   

Again  in  the  Commentary  of  *Visuddhi  Magga*  (*Visuddhi*  2-237)  it  has  been indicated that an individual exercising on the *vipassanâ* insight should try to penetratively know, in part the formation and results of the mind and material forms, by means of the  

` `*paccekkha ñâna* (practical knowledge).  

Therefore, a Noble one, when culturing the causes of the Past, should concentrate in such a way that as different visual forms are recognized by the consciousness of visual  perception so should *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdam* and *sankhâra* of the Past *kamma* be acquired  by the light of *vipassanâ* knowledge. 

Among the sentient beings, one is different from another with regard to the *avijjâ,  tahnâ, upâdam*, the *sankhâra kamma* also is different among individual beings. 

Some wish to be a monk and so performed *karma*-formation in the Past to be reborn as a male.  Such an action is surrounded by wrong-knowing as a “male” is *avijjâ* (ignorance),  attachment  to  a  male’s  life  *tahnâ*  (craving),  holding  on  to  it  mentally  *upâdan* (grasping).  Some wish to be female. Some wish to be a female and so performed *karma*-formation in the Past to be reborn as a female.  Such an action is surrounded by wrong-knowing as a “female” is  *avijjâ* (ignorance), attachment to a female’s life  *tahnâ*  (craving), holding on to it mentally  *upâdan* (grasping). 

In the same way, individuals are usually dissimilar in action of mind.  Some meditating individuals enjoy more benefit from the action of alms offering, some from exercise in *sîla* (virtue), and some from *bhâvanâ* (mental culture).  In the alms offering action again, some benefit from donation of food, some from offering of flowers, and some from donation of robe.  Similarly in the action of *sîla*, some are benefited from the 

Five Precepts, some from Eight Precepts, and some from Ten Precepts.  In mental culture too, some are benefited by *Ãnâpâna* (in-breath and out-breath mental culture), some by  *mettâ  bhâvanâ*  (cultivation  by  mind  of  love  to  all  living  beings),  and  some  by *kasinabhâvanâ* (mental cultivation of hypnotic circles).  {Here special reference is made to *upâcâra* (approach), *kâmâvacara* (world of pleasures), and *sammâdhijo* (concentra- tion)}. 

In this way *kamma* may differ among each other in the *yogâvacara* (meditating individuals).  They should concentrate and culture on the fact that *avijjâ* (ignorance), *tahnâ* (craving) and *upâdan* (grasping) differ, that due to such differences as the *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdam* and *sankhâra*, the five aggregates of male, female, celestial being, brahma  etc., arise.  As such results with different forms are recognized by the sense of physical eye, so should they be mentally visualized and cultured by *sammâditthiñânacakkhu* (the right understanding eye of wisdom) called the *paccakkhañânacakkhu* (eye of practical knowledge).   Only  known  and  seen  this  way,  then  —   *itirûpam  samudayo*.  R.  *Itiviññânassa* *samudayo* — *Samudaya* as the object of contemplation will be acquired, as given in *Upanisa Suttan*. 

**Stop a While and Ponder** 

Suppose you the noble one are at the age of 60.  Your mind and matter of rebirth are the mind and matter of the five aggregates of the object of grasping when you began as a conceptus within your mother 60 years ago.  Initiation of these mind and matter of rebirth, the nature of  *nibbatti*  =  nature of the causes are to be cultured by the 

` `*paccakkhanñâna*, as instructed in the Commentaries and Subcommentaries. 

Again these mind and matter of rebirth etc. of the five aggregates, grasping which are functions of the effect of your action caused by *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdam* and *sankhâra*, and *kamma*, are also —  

*Purimakammabhavassamim* .... (*Patisam*.-50). 

***Purimakammabhavassamen**ti purime kammabhave atîtajâtiyam kammabhave  kariyamâneti attho* (*Abhi. ttha.-*2-182; *Visuddhi*-2-214).* 

Such are the collections of *dhamma* formed during the cultivation of *kammabhava*  in the Past, the Commentary and Subcommentary instructed. 

The Lord in *Upanisasuttan* preached that .... 

Because of such  conspicuous causes as *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdam* and *sankhâra*, *dhamma* respectively,  the  nature  of  formation  of  the  five  corporeality,  initiation  of  the  five material quality of rebirth, the *nibbattilakkhanâ* (the character of the formation)  =  nature  of arising. 

He who sees and knows by *paccakkhañâna* can *Ariya Magga Phala* (the Noble Path and Fruition), where all âsava factors no more exist, can be attained.  He who does  not see and know by the *paccakhhañâna* cannot attain *Ariya Magga Phala* (the Noble Path and Fruition), where all factors of *âsava* have ceased.  The nature of the formation of future result due to the present cause, the formation of such a cause, the nature of formation of the future results, called the nature of formation, should be concentrated in a similar way as above.   {The Method of  Contemplation  is treated in detail in section on  

*Paticca samuppâda, Vipassanâ* and *Udayabbaya Ñâna*}. 

So you the noble one should consider whether or not the factors of the Past and Future or the causes and results involved in your Past and Future life be concentrated so 

` `as to know and see penetratively by *sammâditthi ñâna*. 

**Mental Culture of the Past and Future by means of** 

***Anvaya Ñâna*** 

*Anamataggoyam*.  *bhikkhave sansâro, pubbâ kot*.*i*  *na paññâyati* .... (*Sam*.-2: 121). 

In accordance with these doctrines, a living being can recollect his past *sansarâ* journey sequentially by means of *ñâna*.  But it is too long a journey to know the point of initiation.  The formation (or arising) and disappearance throughout this journey of *rûpa- nâma sankhâra* (the material and mental qualities), and their causes and results cannot be  completely concentrated nor cultivated nor analyzed via *ñâna* by a *sâvaka* (a disciple).  

*Dogho balâna sansâro, saddhammam*.*  *avijânatam*.  (*Khu*.-1: 22; *Dhammapada*). 

So long too is the future sansarâ journey for humans without moral sense (foolish humans in short) who are still ignorant of the *dhamma* of the nobles called the Four Noble Truth.  The arising and disappearance throughout this journey of the  *rûpanâma sankhâra*, and causes and results cannot be completely concentrated nor cultured nor analyzed, via *ñâna*, by a *sâvaka*. 

Again during a life time *addhâpaccupanna* (the long present) extending from the start of rebirth to death, *rûpanâma sankhâra* that have been formed, and the causes and results  cannot  be  completely  concentrated  nor  cultured  nor  analyzed  via  ñâna  by  a *sâvaka*.  This is because only  *ekadesa* = concentration, culture and analysis via ñâna can  partly be made by the *sâvakas*. 

Once again let me explain a little further.  Along a life time from rebirth to death, a multitude of material bodies, that have been formed, forming and to be formed, are too many in the existence of a sentient being.  Let alone those formed, in the forming and be formed, the material bodies during the continued existence as arising, static and perishing away states, all the material bodies of medium-sized human are, assumed on the basis of 

knowledge, would be atom-sized particles of ***don***. ***amattâ* = a quarter** of a unit in weight (*Visuddhi*-1-361).  In each of these minute particles there always are the Four Element.  But sâvakas cannot concentrate on each and every element contained in each particle.  Only some element in some particles can be concentrated.  Some *pathavî* *dhâtu* (earth- element) can be captured in the concentration, but some are left out of it.  Note that so also will be the  *âpo dhâtu*  (water-element), and  *upâdârûpa*  (the derived material bodies). 

Similarly in a life time there will be a number of c*akkhuviññâna* = a number of *cakkhuviññânavîthi* (process of *cakkhuviññâna*), and from among these a number of *cak*- *khuviññâ* = a number of *cakkhuviññânavîthi* could have been collected by a *sâvaka*.  A number  of   *cakkhuviññâ*  =  a  number  of  *cakkhuviññânavîthi*  could  have  escaped  a *sâvaka*’s collection.  It should be noted that a similar phenomena occur in *sotaviññâna* =  *sotaviññânavîthi*. 

In exercising *vipassanâ* on *nâma-rûpa* called *addhâpaccuppanna* (the long-period present),  only  a fraction of the whole can be  cultivated,  a larger fraction  escaped the  exercise and being cultivated. 

In  exercising  *vipassanâ*  on  *nâma-rûpa*  called  *addhâpaccuppanna*  (the long-period present), only a fraction of the whole can be cultivated by a meditator. Other fraction escaped the meditation.  So also in concentrating on the Past and Future, some will be collected, but others escaped the collection.  The *nâma-rûpa* left uncollected  become more and more in magnitude. 

In the same way, in exercising on the cause-effect factors, only a small fraction will be collected.  That which escaped collection becomes more and more.  It is because the  *sâvaka* (disciple) can collect only a small fraction of  *kamma-kamma*  results during 

` `that moment. 

The Buddha is endowed with 12 *vipâkas* (consequences of action).  For each vipâka a particular *kamma* is present.  Similarly, each *sâvaka* during his life time must naturally  have  encountered  many  kinds  of  agreeable  and  disagreeable  objects (*Itthârammana* and *Anitthârammana* respectively).  Encountering agreeable objects is  due to *kusalakamma* (meritorious actions) of many a kind in the past.  Encountering disagreeable objects is due to *akusalakamma* (non-meritorious actions) of many kinds in the past.  The objects *kamma* and *kamma* resultants cannot be completely concentrated by a *sâvaka*, because it is not their affair.  The *kamma*-*kamma* resultant which has been con- templated and cultured is very few.  That on which no *vipassanâ* exercise and cultivation  have been made have become a lot more and more. 

The causes and results of the *rûpa* and *nâma* objects called *sankhâra* objects that have been cultivated by *vipassanâ ñâna* (insight knowledge) and those which have been concentrated are referred to as ***dit***.***t***.***h***  ***a** sankhâra dhamma* (*dhamma* that have been seen).  Those that have escaped collection are referred to as ***adit***.***t***.***h*** ***a** sankhâra dhamma* (*dhamma*  that have not been seen), as used by Visuddhi Magga. 

*Paccekkhato ditthassa ârammanassa* .... (*Visuddhi*-2: 280). 

When *sankhâra* object is concentrated and visualized by *vipassanâsammâdi*.*t*.*t* *hi*  (right understanding insight) called *paccakkhan ñâna* .... so was it explained in this. 

*Visuddhi Magga* Commentator Sayâdaw also has explained this *di*.*t*.*t* *ha dhamma* 

as  *sampatidi*.*t*.*t* *ha*  =  ***sampatiupa***.***t***.***t*** ***hita**  sankhâra  dhamma*,  ***adit***.***t***.***h***  ***a  dhamma***  as  ***sampati*** ***adit***.***t***.***h***  ***a*** = ***sampati anupat***..***t*** ***hita** sankhâra dhamma* (*Mahâtî*.-2: 442). 

*Sampatiditthi*  (presently  seen)  =  *sampatiupatthita  sankhâra*  are  the  *sankhâra* *dhamma* which has bee.n.  collected by *paccekkhana ñâna* called *vipassanâ ñâna* (insight  knowledge).  *Sampati adittha* = *sampati anupatthita* (appeared after now) *sankhâra* are groups of *sankhâra* *dhamma* which have escaped collection, and are not concentrated by *paccekkha ñâna* called *vipassanâ ñâna*.  Such *sampati adittha* = *sampati anupadittha* *sankhâra  dhamma*  which  have  escaped  concentration  are  collected  by  *anvaya  ñâna*.  Contemplation  by  means  of  *anvaya  ñâna*  of  cause-result  factors  called  *paccaya pariggaha* *ñâna*  (knowledge founded on acquisition),  has been explained in the  Com- 

mentary of *Visuddhi Magga* as follows. 

*So  evum  paccayato  nâmarûpassa  pavattem  disvâ  yatthâ  idam  etarahi,  evum atîtepi addhâne paccayo pavattittha,  anâgatepi paccayato pavvattissatîti samnupassati*  (*Visuddhi*- 2-234-235). 

*Sampaditthi* (p..r esently seen) = *sampatiupatthita san*..*k* *hâra* are the *sankhâra* *dhamma* which have been collected by *paccekkha ñâna* called *vipassanâ ñâna* (insight 

knowledge).  *Sampati aditthi* (not seen presently) = *sampati anupatthita* (appeared after now) are the groups of *sankhâra dhamma* which have escaped collection, and not cultivated, by *paccekkha ñâna* called *vipassanâ ñâna*.  Such *Sampati aditthi* = *sampati anupatthita sankhâra dhamma* which have escaped collection are concentrated by *anvaya*  *ñâna*.  Contemplation by *anvaya ñâna* of cause-results factors called *paccaya* *pariggaha* 

(*ñâna* formation by acquisition) has been explained in the *Visuddhi Magga* as 

*So evum paccayato nâmarûpassa pavattem disvâ yatthâ idam etarahi*, *evum atîtepi addhâne paccayo pavattitta*, *anâgatepi paccayato pavattissattîti samnupassati (Visuddhi-* 2: 234-235). 

*Pavattem disvâti etarahi pavattem disvâ evumti iminâ na kelanam sappaccaya bhavamattameva paccâma*.*t*.*t* *ham, yâdisehi paccayeti, tâdisehi avijjâdi paccayeheva  atîtepi pavatta*.*t*.*t* *hati paccayasadisetâpi paccayâma*.*t*.*t* *hâti da*.*t*.*t* *habbam (Mahâ*.*t* *î-*2-313). 

When the meditating monk penetratively knows and sees by *sammâditthi ñâna* called the *paccakkha ñâna* that *nâma-rûpa dhamma* of the present are the results of *avijjâ*, *tahnâ, upâdan, sankhâra, kamma* etc.— “Just as the appearance of the present *nâma-rûpa* are due to the cause like *avijjâ*, etc.— in the past period too this *nâma-rûpa* has come into being due to the causes of *avijjâ*.”  In the future also due to the causes like *avijjâ* etc. the *nâma-rûpa* will appear.  Contemplation has to be made repeatedly in this 

` `way by  *anvaya* *ñâna* (*Visud*.*d* *hi*-2: 243; *Mahâtî*-2: 237) 

Because of past causes the present results are formed.  Because of the present causes will the future results be formed.  Only when such cause-effect relations have been concentrated by *paccakkha ñâna*, then those that have escaped the concentration are collected by methods based on *anvaya ñâna*.  It should be noted that because of the past cause the present result is formed; because of the present cause the future result will be formed.  And if these *dhamma* are still unknown, unseen, and not concentrated at all via *paccakkha ñâna*, and so too is in the past-future contemplation.  These are not the affairs of *anumâna* (a guesswork). (For clearer and more information, see *Visuddhi*-2: 233, 235). 

**An Insistence to a Meditator** 

You noble one also—*paccaya pariggaha ñâna* = a knowledge that can analyze and maintain the incidence of the result due to the cause, and when the knowledge has been cultivated, maintain the above causes and results of the past and future by means of anvaya ñâna.  (Way of cultivation of the cause-result *dhamma* is given in detail in  

section on *Pa*.*t* *icca samuppâda*.  Refer to that section if need be).  

Concentration of *vipassanâ* by means of *anvaya ñâna* will be described in the section on *vipassanâ*.  But before going to it the concept of the present as given in  *Udayabbaya ñâna* (knowledge of arising and disappearing) will be discussed. 

**Extracts from *Patisambhidâ Magga*** 

*Jâtam rûpam paccuppanam, tassa nibbattilakkhananam udayo*, *viparinâmalakkahanm vayo*, *anupassanânam*. R.  *Jâta vijjâ paccupannâ*, *sattânibbattilakkhanam udayo*, *viparinâmalakkhanam vayo anupassanâ ñâna* . R.  *Jâto bhavo paccupanno*, *tassa nibbattilakkhanam udayo*, *viparinâmalakkhanam vayo anupassanâñânam* (*Ptisam*.- 52;  *Visuddhi*-2: 265). 

*Paccupannarûpam nâma jâtam khanattayapariyâpananti attho*.  *Tam pana âdito  dupariggahanti santatipaccupannavasena vipassanâbhiniveso kâtabbo* (*Mahâtî.-*2: 414). 

By  the  duration  of  arising  rebirth  as  *upâda-thî-bhin*  (arising-static-perishing away), formation of distinct material bodies. , the *paramattadhammasabhâva* (the nature of  the  ultimate  truth),  the  *attabhava*  (material  body)  that  should  be  achieved  =  the 

*paramattadhammasabhâva*, the group still possessing *attabhava* is the *paccuppanna* (the present).  (This is to  mean  that  the *rûpa*  which is still in  the formation  in which  is involved all the three *khanas*: *upâda, thî, bhin*).  The properties of *sankhata*, (being  conditioned) *sankhatalakkhanâ* (the properties of *sankhata*) are to be taken to represent the beginning of the *rûpa* formation, which is the present, is the *udaya* = formation.  The *sakhatalakkhanâ* that is to be taken as changeable and destructible is *vaya* = damage or destruction. 

Knowledge of repetitive concentration on  *udaya*—*vaya* is the knowledge of  the *udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna*.  R.  

By the duration of arising rebirth referred to as *upâda-thî-bhin* (arising- static-perishing away), formation distinct material bodies, the *paramattadhammasabhâva* (the nature of the ultimate truth), the *attabhava* (material body) that should be achieved = the  *paramattadhammasabhâva*, the *avijjâ* still possessing  *attabhava* is the  *paccuppanna*  (the present).  (This is to mean that the *avijjâ* which is still in the formation in which is involved all the three *khanas*: *upâda, thî, bhin*).  The properties of *sankhata*, (being  conditioned) *sankhatalakkhanâ* (the properties of *sankhata*) are to be taken to represent the beginning of the *avijjâ* formation, which is the present, is the *udaya* = formation.  The *sakhatalakkhanâ* that is to be taken as changeable and destructible is *vaya* = damage or destruction. 

Knowledge of repetitive concentration on  *udaya*—*vaya* i s the knowledge of  the *udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna*.  R.  

By the duration of arising rebirth referred to as *upâda-thî-bhin* (arising-static- perishing away), formation distinct material bodies, the *paramattadhammasabhâva* (the nature of the ultimate truth), the *attabhava* (material body) that should be achieved = the *paramattadhammasabhâva*, the *bhava* still possessing *attabhava* is the *paccuppanna* (the 

present).  (This is to mean that the *bhava* which is still in the formation in which is involved all the three *khanas*: *upâda, thî, bhin*).  The properties of *sankhata*, (being  conditioned) *sankhatalakkhanâ* (the properties of *sankhata*) are to be taken to represent the beginning of the *bhava* formation, which is the present, is the *udaya* = formation.  The *sakhatalakkhanâ* that is to be taken as changeable and destructible is  *vaya* = damage  or destruction. 

Knowledge of repetitive concentration on  *udaya*—*vaya* is the knowledge of  the *udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna*.  R.  

In this *desanâ* from *avijjâ* to *pattibhava* called birth (birth-rebirth existence), the  characters of *paticca samupâda* are all equally the present. 

If the present life is analyzed by periods with characters of *paticca samupâda* in the middle, then *avijjâ sankhâra* are *dhamma* groups of former period.  *Viññâna*, *nâma*- *rûpa*, *sa*.*l* *âyatana*, *phassa*, *vedanâ*, *upâdan* and *bhava* (*kammabhava*) are the *dhamma* groups of the present period.  *Upapattibhava* termed *jâti* are the *dhamma* groups of the 

` `future.*  These *dhamma* are all equally included in the present. 

As mentioned above — it must be noted that, in accordance with the opening of *Mahâ*.*t* *îkâ* — *paccuppannarûpam nâma jâtam khanattayapariyâpannanti attho* (*Mahâtî*.- 2: 419), reference is made to the period when the three *khanas* (moments) are inclusive. 

What it means is that it is true that this *avijjâ* (mentioned above) is the past period that has occurred in the past.  {it refers only to the *avijjâ*, the basic cause of *vipâkavatta* *dhamma*  of  the  *paccuppannabhava*  (the  present  life)}.   This  *avijjâ*,  however,  when formed in the past was distinct as upâda-thî-bhin moments.  At that duration, when the *avijjâ* was apparently occurring, it is only the present *dhamma*.  The formation and disap- pearance of  this present *avijjâ* must be contemplated by *udayabbaya ñâna*.  This *ñâna*  

is the *paccakkha ñâna*. 

In the same way, due to causes such as *avijjâ, tahnâ, and upâdan. sankhâra*, and *kamma* cultivated in the present life (or due to *aparapariyavedaniya kamma* cultivated during the past life, *upapattibhava* termed *jâti* (birth) that is to appear is the dhamma of  the future period.  This *upapattibhava* is going to appear distinctly as *upâda-thî-bhin* in the future.  This *bhava*, in arising and static states, is also the present.  The arising and  perishing away of the present life is concentrated by the *udayabbayânussaya ñâna*. 

It must be realized that the remaining  *dhamma* from  *sankhâra* to  *upâdan* have  been instructed to be taken as the present period. 

**To Note What the Real Meaning Is** 

In whichever period, the past, future or present, the *dhamma* might have existed, still existing or going to exist, if *vipassanâ* is exercised on these to arrive at the  *khanpaccuppanna* (momentary present), the *dhamma* you are concentrating at, *upâda* (contibued formation),  *bhin* (continued perishing),  the three characters are alternately 

` `concentrated to see through the *udayabbaya ñâna*. 

*A*.*t*.*t* *ha addhânavasena pageva udaym*.  *passitvâ t*.*t*.*h*  *itto idha santativasena disvâ* *anukkhamena khnavasena passati* (*Mahât*.*î* .-2: 241). 

*Rûpam*.  *atîtânâgatapaccuppannam*.  *aniccam*.  *khyatthena* (*Patisam*. .-51). 

.. 

*Tassamâ esa yam atîtam*.  *rûpam*. *, tam*.  *yassamâ atîteyeva khînam*. *, nayimam*.  *sampattanti  aniccam k*. *hayetthena* (*Visuddhi*-2: 245; Section on *Sammansana ñâna*). 

indicate*V*d*i* *s*th*u*e*d* *d*a*h*b*i*o* v*M*e *a*m*gg*e*a*n* tiConoemdm *rû*en*p*t*a*a*m*t.o*  r*a*,*t* *î*w*tâ*i*n*th*â* *g*r*a*e*t*f*a*e*p*r*a*e*c*n*c*c*u*e*p*  *p*to*a* *nPnaatmi*.*s*  *a**a**m**n***. ***i**b**c**h**c**i**a**d**m**h*.*â*  ***k** **h**M**y**a**a**g**t***.***t**g*.***h*** *a**e***,***n*** ***a***h a=s  as the *rûpa*  of the past, future and present has the nature of  cessation, destruction, they 

` `are to be contemplated as ***anicca*** (impermanence). 

`         `“Corporeality of past ended in the past, never reaching the present as a continuation.  

` `Since it has the nature of ending and destruction, it is *anicca*.” 

In the ways as above the past, future and present *dhamma* are divisible by means of the long period, and it has been instructed to contemplate these by *kalapasammesa* 

` `(grasping groupwise) *ñâna* named as *vipassanâ* (insight) (see *Visuddhi*-2-245). 

As so instructed, the five *upâdanakkhandhâ* = *âyatana* (12 classes) = 18 *dhatu*, 12 characters of  *paticca samuppâda* etc., the ultimate reality of elements, are cultivated by a  meditator as the past, future and present periods by means of *sammâsana ñâna*. 

As the meditator is  able to exercise *vipassanâ* by the power of *addhâ* of the period, *udaya* (formation), (destruction = *vaya*) will already be seen by *Sammâsana ñâna*. Visualized this way, when a meditator has successfully acquired *sammâsana ñâna* and reacged *udayabbaya ñâna* stage, a series of *rûpasantati* and *nâmasantati*, called a  

series of *santati*, by the power of which arising (and disappearance) of *rûpa* and *nâma* are concentrated by *udayabbayanupassana ñâna*.  Always by the power of *khana* (moment) 

- *vipassanâ* is exercised arrived at *khanapaccuppanna.*  These *sankhâra dhamma* which are cultivated this way by the *vipassanâ ñâna* to arrive at the *khanapaccuppanna* are the 

*sampatiddhi*.*t*.*t* *ha sankhâra*.   The past and future  *dhamma* that have been left uncollected  by the *vipassanâ ñâna* are the *sampatiadit*.*t*. *ha sankhâra* (*Visuddhi*-2-280; *Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2-442). 

When the meditator has completely concentrated the arising and disappearance *dhamma* of  the *santatidittha sankhâra* by means of *udayabbayanupassanâ ñâna* referred to as  the ***paccakkha ñâna***, the past and future called *sampatidittha sankhâra* are con- 

` `templated in continuation by *anvaya ñâna* as instructed by the Commentary of  

*Visuddhi Magga*. 

*Evum ekekassa khandhassa udayabbayadassana dassa dassa katvâ paññâsalakkhanâni*   *va*.*t* *tani*.  *Tesam vasena evumpi rûpassa udaya evumpi rûpassa vayo, evumpi rûpam* 

*udeti, evump*.*i*  *rûpam vetîti paccayato ceva khanato ca vatthâreva mansikâram karoti-*  

*Tassevum manasik*.*a*  *raro* “*iti kirime dhammâ ahuttvâ sambunti, hutvâ pativantî”ti ñânam visadat*.*a* *ram hoti.  Tassevum*.  *paccayo ceva khanato ca dvedhâ udayabbatam*.  *passato*  . 

*saccapaticcasamuppâdanayalakkhanabheda pakatâ hunti* (*Visuddhi-*2-267). 

*Evum manasikaro na yâva udayabbayañânam*.  *uppajjati*, *tava udayabbayâ su*.*l* *u paka*.*t* *a nevau hmu*.  *nvtaîtttia kma*. *t pvâa tvthuattmama*.*ñ*  *“h**i**ñ**ti**i  p**ka**a**r**c**i**c**m**up**e***. *p **d**a**h**n**a**n**m**ad**m**h**â**a.m* R*m*. *â* ***P**n**a**a*.***t**m* ***iv** **e**d**n**is**t**v**î***”*â*t* i*a*, *t*.*n*.*t* *ha*.*ay*  *aadtîatsasnaângaavtees nenaaya vmâ*.*    

*neti* (*Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2-423). 

What the above Commemtary and Subcommentary mean is as follows. 

**The Five *Udaya Ñâna* at *Rûpakkhandhâ*** 

(**The Rise in the Five Kinds Knowledge on Material Body**) 

1. *Avijjâ samudayâ rûpasamudayo*, 
1. *Tahnâ samudayo rûpasamudayo*, 
1. *Kamma samudayo rûpasamudayo*, 
1. *Ãhâra samudayo rûpasamudayo*, 
1. *Nibbattilakkhanam* .... (*Patisam*.-53-54; *Visuddhi*-2-266). 
1. Becasue of *avijjâ*, the material body born of *kamma* is formed, 
2. Becasue of *Tahnâ*, the material body born of *kamma* is formed, 
2. Becasue of *Kamma*, the material body born of *kamma* is formed, 
2. Becasue of *Ãhâra*, the material body born of *kamma* is formed, 
2. The nature of the formation of *rûpa* (corporeality). 

**The Five *Vaya Ñâna* at *Rûpakkhandhâ*** 

**(The Fall in the Five Kinds of Knowledge on Material Body)** 

1. *Avijjâ nirodha rûpanirodha*, 
1. *Tahnâ nirodha rûpanirodha*, 
1. *Kamma nirodha rûpanirodha*, 
1. *Ãhâra nirodha rûpanirodha*, 
1. *Viparinâma lakkhanam* .... (*Patisam*.-53-54; *Visuddhi*-2-266). 
1. Because of cessation of *avijjâ*, material body born of *kamma* ceased, 
1. Because of cessation of *Tahnâ*, material body born of *kamma* ceased, 
1. Because of cessation of *kamma*, material body born of *kamma* ceased, 
1. Because of cessation of *Ãhâra*, material body born of *kamma* ceased, 
1. The nature of cessation of *rûpa* = the nature of destruction. 

In this way there are five kinds of *udayañâna*, five of *vaya ñâna*, which added to a total of 10 kinds of *udayabbaya ñâna*.  In the five corporeality, therefore, there will be 50  kinds.  (see Section on *Udayabbaya Ñâna* of *Vipassanâ*). 

As the nature of each *udaya* and *vaya* are concentrated by *udayabbayanupassanâ* *ñâna*, 50 characters 10 for each  corporeality,  are indicated in  *Patisamdâmagga*.  In  accordance with the method of cencentration described broadly above as — 

“This is the cause of which the *rûpa* is formed, This is the cause of which the *rûpa* ceased, 

So is the *rûpa* formed, 

And so the *rûpa* is destructed, — 

***Paccayato udayabbayadassana*** =  concentration on the fact that because of the nature of the cause, the result is formed, because of cessation of cause, the result ceases, *Khanato udayabbayadassana* = concentration on the nature of cessation and destruction by the nature of the *upâda-thî-bhiñ* called *paccuppannakhana* of the *rûpa*-*nâma*.  By these two methods of  *udayabbaya* on a broad base  the arising  and  perishing away are  concentrated and taken to heart. 

“In this way this *dhamma* which was not there formerly, may suddendly appear,  arises and disappears.”  To a practicing yogi, thsi knowledge will become espcially clear. 

Therefore,  in  the  concentration  of  practicing  yogi  who  is  exercising  with  the knowledge of *udayabbayadassana, paccayatoudayabbayadassana*, *khanatoudayabbaya*- *dassana*, by thess two phenomena, arising and perishing away of the five corporealty will  become clear as 

1. The Four Ultimate Truth, 
1. The *Paticca* *samuppâda dhamma*, the *paticca samuppanna dhamma*, 
1. The four methods called *Ekatta* method, 
4. The Five *Aniccalakkhanâ* (The Five Impermanent characters etc. of the five     characters (Visuddhi-2-267). 

**A Note by Venerable Pye Sayadaw** 

In a meditator, taking to heart this much, *udayabbaya ñâna* cannot be attained yet.  As that much of *udayabbaya* are inconspicuous, they are vaguely guessed by *anumâna*.  Because of this condition, it was comparatively indicated by “*Iti kirime dhammâ*.  R.  

*Pa*.*t* *ivanti*”   stated with reference not to  *paccakkha*  but to   *anumâna kira-saddâ*  (presumptive faith). 

In other words, by *nayadassana* (for the purpose of seeing), the meaning was given this way.  Firstly *udayabbaya* of *paccuppanna dhamma* (*dhamma* of the present) are accomplished by *paccakkha*, and later this method is employed for the past and future (*Pye Visuddhimagga nissaya*, 5: 165). 

This note by  Venerable Pye Sayâdaw is the translation of the the part contained in *Mahâ*.*t* *îkâ* Vol. II (*Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2: 423). 

In this expression — In a meditator, taking to heart this much, *udayabbaya ñâna* cannot be attained yet.  As that much of *udayabbaya* are inconspicuous, they are vaguely guessed by *anumâna*.  Because of this condition, it was comparatively indicated by “*Iti* 

*kir*.*i* *me  dhammâ*.   R.   *Pativanti*”    stated  with  reference  not  to   *paccakkha*   but  to   *anumâna kira-saddâ* (presumptive faith) — it was asserted that once the *udayabbaya* of the *sankhâra dhamma* have been seen by *paccakkha ñâna*, then these *dhamma* are no more required to be concentrated presumptively by *anumâna ñâna*.  This assertion was not satisfactory and, therefore, SubCommentator Sayâdaw added a second method.  The 

` `Venerable Pye Sayâdaw explained the second method as: 

In other words, by *nayadassana* (for the purpose of seeing), the meaning was given this way.  “Firstly *udayabbaya* of *paccuppanna dhamma* (*dhamma* of the present) 

are accomplished by *paccakkha*, and later this method is employed for past and future” . 

According to this explanation, a meditator must first have cultivated as causes: 

1. All the Five *Paccuppannakkhandhâ* (the Present Five Corporeality) are results of the causes such as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdan*, *sankhâra*, *kamma* etc..      
1. The causes of *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdan*, *sankhâra*, *kamma* etc.  (when at the duration of *Arahattamagga*, the 4th Path), cessation which would never ever be formed again, the *anuppâdanirodha*, due to which the five corporeality cease never ever forming again, the nature of *anuppâdaniriodha* (giving rise to cessation), 
1. The arising and perishing away of the Five Present Corporeality, the *udayabbaya* = 

*nibbatti lakkhan*. *â*, *viprin*. *âmalakkha*.*n* *â* — 

are to have been cultivated by the *udayabbayanupassanâ ñâna* called *paccakhha ñâna*.  Only  after  cultivation  by  the  *paccakkha  ñâna*,  then  the  method  of  *anvaya  ñâna*  is accepted as the method for exercising on the past and future *dhamma*.  This *anvaya ñâna*  is the one that always follows *vipassanâ ñàna*. 

**To be Noted Carefully** 

The opening of *Mahâtîk*. *â* (Commentary) runs as — *Paccuppannadhammânam*.  *udayabbayam*.  *disvâ* .... (*Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2: 423) 

In the passage ‘After seeing the *udayabbaya* of *paccuppanna dhamma* — 

1. Because of the distinct formation of the causes like *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *sankhâra*, *kamma*   etc. distinctly arise,  
1. The cessation of the causes like *avijjâ*, etc., by the nature of law of cessation, the  

`         `resultant five corporeality cease, 

(These two are phenomena of *paccayto udayabbaya*) 

3. The  arising  of  the  *paccuppanna  dhamma*  =  *nibbatti  lakkhanâ*  =  destruction  = *viprinâma lakkhanâ* (character subject to change) 

(These two are phenomena of *khanato udayabbaya*) 

*Paccuppannadhammânam*.  *udayabbayam*.  *disvâ* .... (*Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2: 423) 

In this passage remember that both the *paccayato udayabbaya* and the *khanato* *udayabbaya* of the *udayabbaya* are inclusive.  Only when the two kinds *of udayabbaya*,  have been cultivated by *paccakkha ñâna* referred to as *udayabbayanupassanâ*, then  concentrate on the past and future by the same old method of *anvaya ñâna*.  It is the  traditional law in practice which has to be taken with respect. 

Again *Visuddhimagga atthaka*.*t*.*t* *hâ* (*Visuddhi*-2-249).  In *rûpa nibbattipassa âkâra* was instructed due to *sankhâradhamma* cultured surrounded by *avijjâ, tahnâ, upâdan* etc. during the previous life, formation of mental properties of rebirth, along one’s lifetime, respective causes which result in mental properties of  *bhava*  together with those of the 

` `six-door are concentrated by *vipassanâ ñâna*. 

Therefore, with reference to  *paccuppannnadhamma*  note that from the material  quality of rebirth, relevent properties of the five corporeality, are involved. 

Therefore. when *vipassanâ* is exercised with the knowledge of the two kinds of *udayabbayadassana* on the  *paccuppannadhamma*,  start is made from the Five Material Quality of rebirth.  (see *Udayabbaya Ñâna*, Section on *Vipassanâ*). 

Now again concentration by  *Anvaya ñâna*  in  *Bhanganupassanâ ñâna*  will be  

described. 

**How Contemplation is made by *Anvaya Ñâna* in *Bhanganupassanâ Ñâna*** 

- .  . 

*Attha vâ so evum viratto yatthâdi*.*t*.*t* *ham sankhâragatam, tathâ adi*.*t*.*t* *hampi anvayañân*. *avasena nirodheti, no samudeti.  Nirodhatova manasikaroti.  Nirodhamevassa  passati, nosamudayanti at*..*t* *ho* (*Visuddhi*-2:279). 

***Evum viratto**ti evum bhangânupassârenâ viratto.  Yatthâ dittham sampati upatthitam sankhâragatam nirodheti nirodham manasikaroti.  Aditthampi atînâgatam anvayañâna- vasena yatthâ idam etarahi, etam itarepîti anuminanto nirodheti mansikatassâpi nirodham karoti, **no samudhetî**ti itthâpi eseva nayo, no samudayam manasikarotîti attho*.*  

(*Mahât*.*î* .-2: 442). 

*Attha vâ* = in a way.  *Evum*.  = this *bhanganupassanâ* is followed (= always follow this knowledge of *bhanganupassanâ*), *viratto* = lack of attachment.  *So yogâvacara* = that 

m*ni*e*ro*d*d*it*h*a*a*to*m*r. .*  *m* *Dainttahsaikma* *r*=*o* *t*s*i*e *y*e*a*n*t* *t*b*h*y*â**  o=w ans  siefl fc, e*s*s*a*s*n*a*k*ti*h*o*â*n*r* *a*w*g*a*a*s*t* *a*t*m*ak e=n *s* t*a*o*n* *k*h*h*e*â*a*r*rt*a*.*  *d* *Thaatmthmâa* =.   *N*si*i*m*ro*il*d*a*h*rl*e*y*ti*.*   *Aditthampi*  =  past,  future  and  *sankhâra  dhamma*  which  are  not  seen. .   *Anvaya  ñân*. *a* 

. 

. 

. 

. 

vasena = by power of analytical knowledge.  (*Etarahi* = at present.  *Idam yatthâ =* just as this present and *sankhâra* are seen).   *Evum tatthâ* = in the same way.  *Tampi* = that past, future and *sankhâra dhamma* that are not seen.  *Evum sabhâvameva* = so there is nature of cessation, destruction.  *Iti* = in this way.  *Anuminanto* = by comparison).  *Nirodheti* = *nirodham  manasikaroti*  =  *nirodha*  (cessation)  is  taken  to  heart.   *No  samudeti*  =  no *samudayam manmasikaroti* = *samudaya* (passion) is not taken to jeart.  *Nirodhatova* = only by means of cesation.  *Manasikaroti* = taken to heart.  *Asankhâragatassa* = of that *sankhâradhamma.   Nirodhameva*  =  on  only  the  cessation.   *Passati*  =  concentrated.  *Samudayam* = on  *samudaya*.  *No passati* =  not concentrated  (*Pye Visuddhimagga*  *Nissaya*-5-207-208). 

In other words, as the meditator who is free from evil influence, *raga*-free (lust free)  is  always  directed  towards  the  *bhanganupassanâ  ñâna*,  not  clinging  on  to  the *sankhâra dhamma* {by dissociating himself from *râga* for a considerably long period of  time by *vikkhambhanapa* (way of withdrawal from lust)}.  Then cessation of all *dhamma*, that should be known and seen by *bhanganupassanâ ñâna*, and the cessation taken to heart.   

The past, future and *sankhâra dhamma* are taken expectantly by power of *anvaya* *ñâna*.  As the present *bhanganupassanâ ñâna* called the present called *paccakhañâna* enables the meditator to know and see the *sankhâra dhamma*, so also the past, future and the *sankhâra dhamma* that have not yet been seen by the *bhanganupassanâ ñâna* called *vipassanâ ñâna* (insight knowledge) are to be taken to cease in the coming period.  In this  way the nature of cessation, the *nirodha dhamma*, whatever the case may, is taken to heart.  The arising *samudaya* is not taken to heart.  By way of cessation = the cessation  only is taken to heart.  The cessation of the sum total of *sankhâra dhamma* alone are 

concentrated, but not the arising  *samudaya*.   All this is what  the  above  *Pa*.*t* *isambhidâ*  *Magga* really means (*Visuddhi*-2:279; *Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2: 442). 

***Ãrammananvâyena, ubho ekavavatthanâ.***  . *Nirodha adhimottatâ*.*,*  *vayalakkhan*. *avipassanâ (Patisam.*-55). 

*Ãramma*.*n* *anvayena* = as the object really seen presently is always followed. *Ubho* 

- the object presently seen and unseen.  *Ekavavatthanâ* = division by means of the only nature of of arrested moment.  *Nirodhe* = at relentless cessation of the *sankhâradhamma* called *khan*. *ikanirodha* (momentary cessation).  *Adhimottatâ* = being inclined to.  *Esâ* = This is.  *Vayalakkhana vipassana* = mental exercise on the nature of destruction of the 

` `*sankhâradhamma*, or character of this destruction. 

*anvayen**Ã**a**r** **a**a**m**nu**m**ga**a**m*.***n*** ***a**a**n**n**v**e**a**n**y**a**e** y**n**a**a**t th**u**a**b** **h**id**o**a m**k***.  ***a**ta**va**tt**v**h**a**â**t** **t**a**h**t**a**ît**n**e**â**ptii s apnakchcâarkahghaattaom* .  *daibt*.*t*.*hh* *iajjsiatt hâar,a amnmâgaan*. *taesp*. *sia*  

- ...   .. 

*bijjissatîti  evum  ubhannam**   *ekasabhâveneva  vavat*.*t*.*h*  *âpannti  at*.*t*.*h*  *o.   Vattampi  cetam*.  *porân*. *ethi* —  *“*.. *Sam*. *vijjamâhmî visuddhadassano,* 

*tadanvayam*.  *neti atîtanâgate.* 

*Sabbepi sankhâragatâ palokino, ussâvabandû suriyeva uggate”ti (Visuddhi-*2: 280).* 

***Ubho**ti ditthâ d*..*i* *tthab*.*h*. *âvena dvepi ârammnâni.  **Ekavatthanâ**ti khanabhangu-ratâya samânâti vavatthapanâ*.  ***Samvijjâmânahmî**ti paccakkhato upalabbhamâne pac- cuppanne.  **Visuddhassano**ti bhangassanassa paribandhavimenena visuddhañâno.* 

*visuddhabhangassanoti attho.  **Tadanvayam** **netî**ti tassa paccuppannasankhârabhangan- dassino ñânassa anvayam anugatabhûtam ñânam pavatteti.  Kattha pana pavattetîti âha “**atîtanâgate**”ti*.  *Atîte nâgate ca sankhâragate.  **Sabbepî**tiâdi tassa pavattanâkâradasa-  nam* (*Mahâtî*-2: 443). 

*Ñâtanca ñânanca ubhoppi vipassati*  (*Visuddhi*-2: 278). 

*Ãrammananvayena  atto  ekavavatthnâ*  =  *dhamma  named  ñâta,  dukkha  saccâ, samudaya saccâ,* which have been prenetratively seen and known, *vipassanâ ñâna* named *ñâna* (knowledge) {the socalled *lokîmagga saccâ* (the Right Path *Dhamma* of ordinary world)}.  As this *sankhâra* object, known as *ñâta ñâna dhamma*, was always followed, and as one knows the perishing of the *paccuppannadhamma* and the *sankhâra dhamma* which  is  definitely  seen  by  the  knowledge  of  *anubanga  ñâna*  so  also  the  *sankhâra* *dhamma* of the past has perished.  In future too they will perish.  Concentration should well be made with the notion that these objects, the *dittha* (seen) and *adittha* (not seen) object, by *vipassanâ ñâna*, are constinuously perishing away.  This is the essence of the 

` `above descriptions.  Indeed, the commentators of the early days have expounded as — 

*Samvijjâmânahmî*. R. *Uggate*.  (Vide supra) 

*Samvijjâmânahmî* = by means of *paccakkha*, by *paccakkha ñâna* cultivated, the whole *paccupanna sankkhâra dhamma* (= means the *dhamma* that are seen).  *Visuddha*- *dassano* = especially clean, that which concentrate on the destruction of the *sankhâra dhamma*, the meditator who has the *bhanganupassanâ ñâna*.  *Tadanvayam* = the  *vipassanâ ñâna* which always follows *bhanganupassana ñâna* directed at *paccuppanna* of the perishing of *sankhâra dhamma*.  Atîte = *sankhâra dhamma* of the past, *anâgate* =  *sankhâra dhamma* of the future.  *Neti* = reflects = makes it happen.  *Sabbepi* = entirely. *Sankhâraggatâ* = *sankhâra* of the past, future and present.  *Palokino* = possesses the nature of perishing.  *Kiniva*  =  as to how it all happens =  *suriye*  = As the sun.  *Uggate* =   rises.  *Ussavabandu* = the now.  *Palokatiiva* = disappear (*Visuddhi*-2-280). 

When a meditator, who especially has the clean *anubhangâ ñâna*, concentrating on the perishing away of all the *paccuppannadhamma sankhâra*  by means of *paccakkhâ ñân*. *a*  acquired  through  *paccakkha*  (practice),  always  following  the  *bhanganupassanâ ñân*. *a* for which *viassanâ ñân*. *a* is formed — as this *sankhâra* object known as *ñâta ñân*. *a* *dhamma* was always followed, and as one knows the perishing away of *paccuppanna* 

*dhamma*, the *sankhâradhamma*, which is definitely seen by the knowledge of *anubhanga ñân*. *a*, so also the *sankhâradhamma* of the past perished.  The all complete past,, future and present *sankhâra dhamma* have the nature of perishing away.  These happen in a way similar the disappearance of snow when exposed to sunlight (*Visuddhi*-2-280; *Mahât*. *î*.-2- 433). 

***Nirodhe Adhimuttâ* = Inclination to *Khananirodha*** 

- .  .  . 

.. 

***Nirodhe  adhimuttatâ**ti  evum  ubhannam  bhangavasena  ekavavatthânam  katvâ tassamaññeva  bhanghasankhate  nirodhe  adhimuttatâ  taggâretâ  tannañnatâ  tap*. *ponatâ* 

*tappabhâratati at*..*t* *ha.  **Vayalakkhanavipassanâ**ti esâ vayalakkhanavipassanâ mâti vittam*.*   *hoti (Visuddhi*-2-280). 

***Bhangasankhate nirodhe*,** *na nibbanasankhâteti addhippayo.  Esâti yâ aramma- nanvayena ubho ditthâ dit*.*t*.*h* *e kha*..*n* *abanguratâya ekanhâvena vevatthâppa*.*n*. *â, esâ vaya- lakkhane viparinâmalakkhane vipassanâ bhanganupassanâti attho (Mahâtî.*-2: 443). 

- *Nirodhe adhimuttatâ* = *khananirodhañca* mediation means = in this way *dittha* 

*sankhâra*  and  *adit*..*t* *ha  san*..*k* *hâra*,  the  two objects  of  the *vipassanâ  ñân*. *a*,  by  virtue. . of incessantly  perishing  moments,  are  similar  —  classified  and  emphasized  only  in  the 

momentary  cessation  referred  to  as  cessation  momentarily  of  the  perishing  of  these 

*sankhâra  dhamma*.   Taking  to  heart  these  phenomena  of  inclination  only  to  that *khananirodha*, and of the respect to *khananirodha* are *nirodha adimut*..*t* *atâ* = cessation is taken  to  heart.   Thus  concentrated  by  *paccakkha*  =  following  *sankhâra*  object  by 

concentration with *paccakkha ñâ*.*n* *a dit*.*t*. *ha* and *adit*..*t* *ha* objects are considered to be similar by way of *khanabhanga* means concentrtation on the perishing called *vayakhanânupassa*- 

*n*. *â* = *bhanganupassanâ* (*Visuddhi*-2-280; *Mahât*. *î.-*2: 443). 

**Objects of Concentration by *Bhangânupassanâ Ñâna*** 

*Dhamma* on how to concentrate on these *vipassanâ*  by  *bhangânupassanâ*  via  *paccakkha* have been expatiated in *Pa*.*t* *isambhidâmagga* in this way. 

*Katham ârammanam patisankhâ bhangânupassane paññâ vipassane ñânam — rûpârammanata cittam uppajjitvâ bijjati,  tam arammanam  patisankhâtassa  cittassa  bañgam anupassati*.  R.  

*Vedanârammanatâ.*  R*.  Sankhâramma*.  *Viññânârammanatâ.  Cakkhu*. R.  *Jarâ- maranârammanatâ  citamm  uppajjitvâ  abhijjati*,  *tam ârammanam  patisankhâ tassa  citassa bhañgam anupassati* (*Patisam.-*55). 

- *Rûpâ*, *vedanâ*, *saññâ*, *sankhâra, viñañ* etc. of *sankhâra* object are to be concen-

trated with the notion of their nature of their *khaya-vaya* (to be liable to extinction and perishing) = cultivated by *vipassanâ* way.  The knowledge that recognizes the nature of  the incessant perishing away of the *vipassanâ* on which concentration is being made do exist.  Such a knowledge is the  *vipassanâ* *ñâna* (insight knowledge)  =  should be recog- nized as *bhangânupassanâ ñâna*.  How does that knowledge then come into existence? 

*Vipassanâ citta* (the insight mid), the only object of which is on  *rûpa* (material) *dhamma*, can arise and perish.  That material object is visualized by the nature of *khaya*- *vaya*, and the knolwdge of the nature of the *khaya-vaya* which is the cause of perishing of *vipassanâ citta*  is repeatedly concentratd by the  *vipassanâ citta*  in the wake of the  previous one.  R.  (*Patisam*.-55). 

***Ñâta dhamma* and *Ñâna Dhamma Dhamma* of Realization and of Knowledge** 

In this field of *bhangânupassanâ*, the objects of meditation by *vipassanâ ñâna* (insight knowledge), because they are the *dhamma* known penetratively by *vipassanâ* ñâna,  are  the  *Ñâta  dhamma*.   These  *ñâta  dhamma*  including  the  five  *khandhâs* (corporealities),  12  classes of *âyatana*, 18 of  *dhâtu*  (elements) and  the  12  classes  of *paticca samuppâda* from *avijjâ* (ignorance) to *jarâ* (decay) and *marana* (death).  The *vipassanâ*  knowledge that  concentrates on the nature of  perishing of these  *sankhara*  *dhamma* is the *Ñâna dhamma*. 

Meditation  has  to  be  made  alternately  on  the  three  properties  of  the  existing things,  taking  the  nature  of  the  perishing  away  of  these  *ñâta  dhamma*  as  object  of concentration. This knowledge of *vipassanâ* concentration = *vipassanâ* meditating *citta* and its nature of perishing away is taken as the object for *vipassanâ citta* that follows and concentrated on  the three properties of the existing things  alternately.   Therefore, the  commentators of the early days had instructed as 

*Ñâtañca ñânañca ubhopi vipassati* (*Visuddhi*-2-278; *Pa*.*t* *isam*. *.-tha.-*1-239). 

Meditate on both *ñâta* and *ñâna dhamma*.  These *ñâta* and *ñâna* are the objects of concentration of the *bhangânupassanâ ñâna*.  The *dit*..*t* *ha sankhâra dhamma*  are to be discerned by the *paccakkha ñâna* called *bhangânupassanâ ñâna*.  Remember that these 

*di*.*t*.*t* *ha sankhâra dhamma* include the 12 classes of *paticca samuppâda* from *avijjâ* to *jarâ*  *marana*. 

At  this  point,  according  to *jâti*,  *jarâ* and *marana  —*  *Jâtijarâmaranavuntânam khandhânam vasena pariyâyena vuttâni* (*Patisam.-tha.-*1-222).  *Jarâmaranasîsena cittha jarâmaranavuntava dhammâ gahitâ* (*Sam.*- *tî.*-2-78).  This refers to material bodies that  possess the distinct nature of *jâti, jarâ, maranâ dhamma*. 

***Cittan**ti cittha sasampayttacitam adhippetam*  (*Patisam.*-*tha.*-1-239). 

Here instruction is given to discern on the perishing of previous *vipassanâ citta* by the later *vipassanâ citta*.  In instructing so, *vipassanâ citta* together with contemporary *sasampayttacetacika dhamma* on the basis of *citta* (mind) is required.  The *vipassanâ*  *citta* together with contemporary *sasampayuttacetacika dhamma*  based on mind means series of  *mahâkuso*  (meritorious), *manodvârika*  (mind door) and process of  *viapssanâ* 

` `*jhâna* occurring in the mind of practising noble ones (*ariyas*) and noble humans. 

Therefore, if practisng individual (the meditator) would like to exercise on these characters of  *paticca samuppâda* by knowledge of  *hangânupassanâ ñâna*, both *ñâta* and  *ñâna* factors must be concentrated on. 

The features of *paticca samuppâda* from *avijjâ* through *jarâ* to *marana*, classified  by  the  three  periods,  are  groups  of  *ñâta  dhamma*.   The  *vipassanâ  ñâna*,  the  insight knowledge, (= *bhavangânupassanâ ñâna*), by which the destruction these *ñâta dhamma*,  taken as object of concentration,* are (= the process of the *jhanic* state *vipassanâ* via mind door for the worldling and practising individuals) *ñâna dhamma*.  The *vipassanâ ñâna*, insight knowledge (= *bhavangânupassanâ ñâna*), by which the nature of destruction of these *ñâta dhamma* are taken as the object in the concentration, are (= the process of the *jhanic* state *vipassanâ* via mind door for the worldlings and practising individuals) *ñâna dhamma*.  Only when these *ditthasanklhâra dhamma* have successfully been discerned penetratively by *bhangânupassanâ ñâna*, referred to as *paccekkha ñâna*, then by means of *anvaya ñâna* that always follows *bhangânupassanâ ñâna*, the past and future *sankhâra* *dhamma*,  which are not presently seen,  are concentrated by the same method.  This 

` `*anvaya ñâna* is that knowledge which always follows the insight knowledge. 

The object of contemplation  *iti rûpassa atthañgamo*  etc., as exposed in the  ***Upanissasuttan*,** indicated above, will again be presented in continuation. 

***Iti rûpassa atthañgamo*.  R.  *Iti viñân*. *assa atthañgamo*.** 

***Iti rûpassa atthañgamo**ti evum*.  *avijjânirodhadivasen*. *a pañcahâkârehi rûpassa atthañgamo*.  *Vedanâdîsupi eseva nayo.  ayama*.*t*.*t* *ha sankhepo, vattharo pana*  

*visuddhimagge udayabbayañânakatthâya vatto* (*Dî.-tha.*-2-373). 

1. *Avijjânirodhâ, rûpanirodhoti paccayanirodhat*.*t*. *hena rûpakkhandhassa vayam*.  *passati,* 
1. *Tahnânirodhâ rûpanirodhoti paccayanirodha*.*t*.*t* *hena rûpakkhandhassa vayam*.  *passati*, 
1. *Kammanirodhâ rûpanirodhoti paccayanirodhat*.*t*. *hena rûpakkhandhassa vayam*.  *passati,*   54..    *VÃiphârirnaânmiraolhaâk krhûapnaanmi*.*r*  *opdahssoatin tpoapci craûypaankikrhoadnhdaat*..*ts* *hsean vaa ryûapma*.  *kpkahsasantdih*. *assa vayam*.  *passati*,     

*Rûpakkhandhassa vayam passantopi imâni pañca lakkhanâni passati* (*Patisam*.-53;  *Visuddhi*-2: 266). 

. 

In concord with these *desanâs*, meditation in brief are.  as follows.  . 

1. Because of cessation of *avijjâ* the *rûpa* ceases, (*Anuppâdhanirodha*) 
1. Because of cessation of *tahnâ* the *rûpa* ceases, (*Anuppâdhanirodha*) 
1. Because of cessation of *kamma* the *rûpa* ceases, (*Anuppâdhanirodha*) 
1. Because of cessation of *âhâra* the *rûpa* ceases, (*Anuppâdhanirodha*) 

\2.  The nature of cessation of *rûpa* the *rûpa* ceases, (*Uppâdhanirodha*). 

***ANUPPÃDANIRODHA*** 

***Avijjânirodho rûpanirodho**ti anâgatabhavassa paccayabhûtâya imassamim bhave avijjâya arahattamaggañânena nirodhe kate paccayâbhâvâ anâgatassa rûpassa* 

*anuppâdo nirodho hotîti attho.  **Paccayanirodhatthenâ**ti paccayassa niruddhabhâvenâti attho.  Norodho cittha anâgatapatissandhipaccayânam idha avijjâtahnâkammânamyeva*  

*nirodho* (*Ptisam.-Tha.*-1: 236). 

***Avijjânirodho rûpanirodho**ti eggamaggañânena avijjâya anuppâdanirodhato anâgatassa rûpassa anuppâdanirodho hoti paccayâbhâve abhâvato.  **Paccayanirodhatthenâ**ti avijjâsankhâtassa anâgate uppajjanakarûpapaccayassa  niruddhabhâvena.  **Tahnânirodho kammanirodho**ti itthâpi eseva nayo* (*Mahâtî*-2: 421). 

Throughout the rounds of rebirth the *rûpa* and *nâma dhammas* come to their end after going through arising-static-perishing away trend.  This cessation, if the causes still remain, has a chance to make a  reappearance in future.  Perishing and cessation at the 

` `end (*bhañga*) of these *sankhâra dhammas* are called *uppâdhanirodha* (cessation, but reappearable). 

When *arahatthamagga* (the 4th Path) is achieved, *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *sankhâra* and *kamma*, which are completely eradicated due to, and by *arahatthamagga* via virtue of   *samucchedapa*.  They cease in such a way they never reappear.  This is the *anuppâda*- *nirodha* (cessation, but reappearable).  If the *arahatthamagga ñâna* (the knowledge of the 4th Path), however, has not been acquired and these *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâra* and *kamma* have not ceased, these very *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâra*  and *kamma* are 

` `the causative factors for the next life called the future rebirth. 

But if a noble meditator tried to arrive at *arahattamagga* then, due to *arahatta*- *magga*, the *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâra* and *kamma* cease in a way that they will never be formed once again.  This is the *uppâdanirodha*.  In this way when *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâra* and *kamma* by nature of *auppâdanirodha*, the future rebirth, called *rûpa*  and  *nâma*  (mind and matter)  ceases by non-reappearable cessation.  This is the  *anuppâdanirodha*. 

Similarly, *citta* (mind), *utu* (physical change), *âhâra* (nutrition) etc., named *pavat*- *tipaccaya* (cause-derived forms) cease once and for all, and never formed again in future.  When they cease by nature of *anuppâdanirodha,* future material phenomena of mind, of physical change and the material quality born of nutrition (each of which has a chance to  reappear if respective causes still prevail) of future also cease.  This is *anuppâdanirodha*. 

The *yogâvacara* individual should discern, by *udayabbayanupassanâ ñâna*, called *paccakkha ñâna*,  the  cessation  of  mind  and  material  of  the  future rebirth  etc.  of  the Resultant Five Corporeality by way of *anuppâdanirodha* nature.  This cessation occurs due to cessation of the factors of the 4th Path of *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâra* and *kamma*.  Continuous perishing of the Five Aggregates by  *bhañkhana* called  *uppâdana*- *nirodha*, and it should be discerned in the same way.  

If the *yogâvacara* individual attempting to acquire, by *udayabbayânupassanâñânâna* called *paccakkha ñâna*, is still at *puthujana* (worldling) stage, then the attainment of the  *arahatthamagga* (the 4th Path) may occur in the life future to the present one, or it may 

be in the future life just as *Ghatibhyamâ* did.  If the attainment certainly of the 4th Path is at the *Pacchimabhavika* (later past) of the present life, then that period of the acquirement  of the 4th Path will be the future of the present existence.  If the attainment of the 4th 

Path certainly is in one of the later lives, the the period of the acquirement of 4th Path is a  future life. 

At the time of acquirement of the *arahattamagga* in future, when such causes as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâta* and *kamma* cease, because of the 4th Path, by nature of *anuppâdanirodha*, discernment should made of the cessation of mind and matter of the Five Corporeality of the future, following death, by nature of *anuppâdanirodha*.  Should 

` `it be contemplated by *paccakkha ñâna* or *anvaya ñâna*?  Answer to this is as follows. 

*Ñânasamañgi puggato cakkhunâ viya c*.*a* *kkhunâ rûpâni, ñâ*.*n* *ena viva*.*t* *te dhamme passati*  (*Sam*.-*Th*.*a*  .-2: 49). 

- . 

***Janato**ti vâ vattvâ jânanam anussvâkâraparivitakkamattavasena idhâdhippetam attha kho rûpâni viya cakkhuñânena rûpâdîni tesam*.  *ca samudayadike paccakkha katvâ*  

- . 

. 

*dassanti vibhâveton* “***passato*”***ti attanti evum vâ ittha attho* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 63). 

As a man with physical eye sees a variety of mental objects by consciousness by way of sight, a meditator possessed of *vipassana* insight referred to as *udayabbaya ñâna*, must discern by light of wisdom emitted by the *vipassanâ ñâna* being exercised upon, the  following. 

*Na jhânam*.  *anussavâkâraparivitakkamattavasena idhippetam*.  (*Sam*. .-*Tî.-*2-63).   

. 

*Anussaya*  understanding,  knowledge  handed  down  from  the  teachers,  such  as “This may be it.   This is what probably is.”,  thinking on the basis of environmental 

` `factors = *âkâraparivitakka* = knowledge acquired by mere thinking are not relevent here.         However, *pat*.*t*.*h*  *amahñi paccuppanadhammânam*.  *udayabbayam*.  *disvâ a*.*t*.*t* *a atînâgtâte nayam*.  *neti* (*Mahâ*.*t* *î*.-2-423), as stated in *Mahâ*.*t* *îkâ*, the *upâdânakkhandhâ* (the factor of 

five-fold  clinging  to  the  existence)  which  are the *paccuppannadhammas*  (the  present *dhammas*), the nature of their formation (*sankhâra*) and their dissolution (*atthangama*) are to be discerned by the *udayabbaya ñâna* referred to as *paccakkha ñâna* (practical knowledge).  Once discerned successfully by *paccakkha ñâna*, the *sankhâra dhammas* (the factors of the formation) of the past and future can be discerned in the same way.  It should, however, be noted that 

1) The five *upâdânakkhandhâ*, which are the *dhammas* of the present, 
1) The nature of their *samudaya*, 
1) The nature of their dissolution, 

when discerned by *udayabbaya ñâna* called *paccakkhan ñâna*, are not free from the past  and future. 

Now the extracts from *Upanisasuttan* have come to an end. 

**Extracts from *Ãsvakkhaya Suttan*** 

*Jhânatoham*.  *bhikkave passato âsavânam*.  *khayam*.  *vadâmi, no ajhânato no apassato. Kañca bhikkhave jhânato kam*.  *passato âsavânam*.  *khayo hoti*?--“*idam*.  *dukkhan”ti bhikkhave jhânato passato âsavânam*.  *khayo hoti, “ayam*.  *dukkhasamudayo”ti bhikkhave jânatopassato âsavânam*.  *khayo hoti, “ayam*.  *fukkhanirodhagâmini patipadâ”ti bhikkhave jhânato passato âsavânam*.  *khayo hoti.  Evum*.  *kho bhikkhave jhânato evum*.  *passato âsavânam*.  *khayo hoti* (*Khu*.-1: 265; *Itivuttaka*). 

*Bhikkhus* .... I preach the attainment of *ariyamagga* (the Noble Path), where *dhammas* of *âsava* cease, to those who know and see.  I do not preach the attainment of 

` `*ariyamagga*  to those who know not and see not.   (*Aham  ariyamaggâmam  vadâmîti  vattam* *hoti* (*Itivattaka-Tha*-311). 

- . 

*Bhikkh*. *us* .... What *dhammas* do those individual know and see to have attained the Noble  Path where *âsava dhammas* have ceased? 

1. *Bhikkus* .... Those who know and see as “This is the Noble Truth of Suffering” will 

acquire the *ariyamagga* where all *âsava dhammas* have ceased. 

2. *Bhikkus* .... Those who know and see as “This is the Noble Truth of the cause of Suffering” will acquire the *ariyamagga* where all *âsava dhammas* have ceased. 
2. *Bhikkus* .... Those who know and see as “This is the Noble Truth of the cessation of Suffering” will acquire the *ariyamagga* where all *âsava dhammas* have ceased. 
2. *Bhikkus* .... Those who know and see as “This is the the pactice leading to *Nibbâna* where the Suffering has ceased = Noble Truth of the Path”, will acquire the  

`                 `*ariyamagga* where all *âsava dhammas* have ceased. 

*Bhikkhus* ...only he who knows and sees this way will acquire the Noble Path,  where all *âsava dhammas* have ceased (*Khu*.-1: 265; *Itivuttaka*). 

**The Openings of Commentary - The First Opening** 

***Jhânato**ti jhânantassa*. *.  **Pas***.***s*** ***ato**ti passantassa*.  *Yadipi Imâni dv*.*e*  *pi padâni ekattân*.*i* , *byañjhanamevanânam*, *evum santepi* “*jhâ*. *nato”ti ñânlakkhanam uppâya*.  *Puggalam* 

*niddisati*.  *Jhânan*.*a* *lakkhanam*.  *hi ñânam*.  “*Passato”ti ñânappabhâvum*.  *upâdâya*.  

*Dassanappabhâvum hi upâdâya ñânasamingi puggalo cakkhumâ viya viya puggalo  cakkhunâ rûpâni*, *ñân*. *ena vivutte dhamme passati* (*Itivuttaka-Tha.-*310) 

***Jhânato*** = only he who *e*k*v*n*a*o*m*w*a*s*t*,*t* *hpea snsiayatom* =*o**  o*ic*n*c*l*h*y *i*h*to*e.  w (*S*h*a*o*m* s. e*.T*e*î*s- 2(*J*: *h*6*â*4*n*)*a*. *to eva passato evâti*  

Though these two structurally different terms bear the same essence, the term ***jhânato***  indicates  the  individual,  on  the  basis  of  character  of  his  ability  to  know penetratively  the true  nature  of  the  objection  question.   Indeed,  *Samâdithi  ñâna*  (the knowledge of right understanding) possesses the character of knowing penetratively the true nature of the object. 

The term *passato* refers to an individual who is capable of seeing the true nature of  the  object  by  means  of  power  of  knowledge.   Indeed.   *Sammâditthi  ñâna*  (  the knowledge of right understanding) is endowed with the power of seeing the object in its  true nature.  As an individual could see the material being (*rûpa*) by physical eye, so a meditator with competent  *sammâditthi ñâna*  could see the true nature of the Four Noble  Truth by the light of wisdom having property of brilliance (*Itivuttaka-Tha*.-311). 

**The Second Opening of the Documentary** 

*Atha vâ **jhânato**ti anubodha ñân*. *ena jhânato*.  ***Passato**ti pativedhañânena passato*  (*Itivuttaka*-*Tha*.-310). 

In other words, *jhânato* refers only to him who knows by *anubodhañâna*.  *Passato* refers  only to him who knows by *pativedañ*. *âna* (penetrative knowledge). 

*Duvidham*.  *hi saccañânam*.  *anibidhañânam*.  *pativedhañânañca. Attha anubidhañâna lokiyam*.  *anussavâdivasena nirodhe magge ca pavuttat*.*i* *.  Pativedhañânam*.  *lokutt*.*a*  *ram*.*  

*nirodhamârammanam*.  *katvâ kiccato cattâri saccâni pativijehati (Visuddhi*-1-142).*   *Duvidam*.  *hi saccañânam*.  *lokiyam*.  *lokuttarañca.  Lokikam*.  *duvidam*.  *anubodhañânam*.*  

**.** 

*mpaagcgcea cvae kpkahvauntatañ*. *tâi.n  aDñuckah. e **A** sa**n**m**ub**u**o**d**d**a**h**ye**a** **ñ**c**â**a**n** â**a**r**m**am âmdiaknaamkmarieknaass vaa asnenuass. i v**P**â**a**d**c**i**c**v**a**es**v**e**e**n**k**a**k** **h**n**e**ir**ñ**o**â**d**n**h**a**e**m*** **.**  *patipvaatdivdehdahsaañccâansasma*.*   *ckaattîvsâu pcia sttaâcrci asmac âcrâanmi pmaavnijkjahraatiñ* (*aPvaatsiesnaam.*.*  *.* -*L*1*o*: *k*3*u*4*t*2*ta*).*r* *am*.*   

In the *santâna* (life continuum) *vipassanâ* exercising monk, who is a worldling, before arriving at *Ariyamagga* (Noble Path), attaining the knowledge of the Noble truth of Suffering and the Noble Truth of Formation is a priority.  In these two are 

1. *Uggahap*. *ativedha*  =  penetratively  understanding  by  learning  the  relation 

between the truth of suffering and of formation. 

2. *Paripucchâpa*.*t* *ivedha* = penetratively understanding by repetitive requisition of  

the meaning regarding the relationship between the truth of suffering and of formation. 

`           `The knowledge of truth (*sacca ñân*. *a*), which penetratively knows the Four Noble Truth, is of two kinds: *lokîsacca ñân*. *a* (knowledge of truth of mundane) and  *lokuttarâsacca ñân*.*a* (the knowledge of truth of supra-mundane).  Again the *lokîsacca- ñâna*  can  be  of  *anubodha  ñân*. *a*  (knowledge  acquired  from  the  predecessors)  and *paccavekkhana ñân*.*a* (reviewing knowledge).  In the mind of a worldling who has just gained momentum in the practice of meditation (a beginner in meditation in short), the truth  of  the  supra-mundane,  such  as  *asankhatadhâtu*  (non-dynamic  element),  the knowledge of peacefulness, called *nibbâna dhamma*) which is the Truth of Cessation, and *Ariya Magga* (Noble Path) which can concentrate on the Noble Truth of Cessation, and the Noble Eight Path.  These appear in the meditator by three means, viz., by following the conception acquired by 

1. *Anussava* = knowledge acquired from the teachers. 
1. *Ãkâraparivitakka*  =  knowledge  acquired  by presumption  that:  if  there is such  a 

*dhamma* as death, then there must be one where there is no death.” 

3. *Dothinijjhânakkhantianugata* = by concentration, by being satisfied = satisfaction  

on the conception by thinking. 

Such a knowledge acquired via the above three means is also called _**anubodha**- **ñân**_**. _a_**, the _anubodha_ knowledge (It is the **_Anumâma_**, the knowledge acquired through the guesswork.  This **_anubodha_** knowledge appears in one by concentrating on  _dukkha_-  _saccâ_ and _samudayasaccâ_  (the Truth of suffering and of formation) as the object of concentration.  (It is the knowledge from personal experience, the _paccakkhañâna_). .T he _paccavekkhañâna_  (.r eviewing  knowledge)  appears  in  the  Noble  Ones,  who  have penetratively concentrated and cultured the Four Noble Truth by power of concentration on  each  and  every  one   of  the  Four  Noble  Truth.   _Pativedhañân_. _a_  (penetrative knowledge), the _lokottarasaccâñân_. _a_ and element of peacefulness, or the _Nibbâ_._n_ _a dham- ma_ called the _dhamma_ of Truth of  Cessation is concent.r ated as the object and penetra- tively knows the Noble Truth (_Visuddhi_-1: 142; _Patisam_.-_Tha_.-1: 342). 

*Evamassa  pubbabhâge  dvîsu  saccesu  uggahaparîpucchasavanadâ  renasamma- sanapativedho hoti, dvîsu savanapativedoyeva.  Aparabhage tîsu kiccato pa*. *tivedho hoti,*.*   *nirodhe  ârammanapativedho.   Tatthâ  s*.*a* *bbampi  pativedhoñânanam  l*.*o* *kuttara*.*m*  *.  Savanadhara*.*n* *asammasanañânam lokuttaram.  Savanadhanasammasanañânam lokiyam  kâmâvacaram*  (*Abhi.-Tha.-*2: 109). 

In the life continuum (*santâna*) of a monk, a worldling, who has just gaine momentum in the practice of meditation, before arriving at *Ariya Magga*, which is the Noble Truth of Suffering and  Noble Truth of Cause, knowledge has to be attained by 
