***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPA IPADĀ 

**THE CONCENTRATION SHOULOD BE DEVELOPED** 

**VOLUME I SECTION 2 Page 186 – 200** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipi*** ***akadhara*)** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE39

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE-201** 

10. **The momentary concentration in *vipassanā*** **stage** 

There are five kinds of discriminative knowledge (***pariggaha***) as follows. 

1. the discriminative knowledge on the corporeality (***rūpa pariggaha***), 
1. the discriminative knowledge on the mentality (***arūpa pariggaha***), 
1. the  discriminative  knowledge  on  the  both  corporeality  and  mentality  (***rūpā-rūpa pariggaha***) 
1. the  discriminative  knowledge  on  the  causes  and  results  of  present  period  (***paccaya pariggaha***), 
1. the  discriminative  knowledge  on  the  causes  and  results  of  past  and  future  (***addhāna pariggaha***) 

The  term,  ***pariggaha***  means  the  ability  to  discriminate  and  keep  in  mind  by knowledge, on any kind of object. It is instructed that only a such ***meditator*** who had fulfilled five  kinds  of  discriminative  knowledge  thoroughly,  should  like  to  endeavour  to  fulfil ***vipassanā*** knowledge, such as ***sammasana ñā*** ***a***, according to ***Visuddhi*-2-244**. ***aniccādivasena vividehi*** ***ākārehi dhamme passatīti vipassanā*****. (*Abhi-A*-1-175).** 

The ultimate corporeality and mentality, the causes and results belong to past, future, present, internal and external etc … are the objects of ***vipassanā*** insight. These objects are also called ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** because these ***dhamma*** can be appeared by respective causes which become co-operative factors. These ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** are also the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering, according to preaching way of Four Noble Truths (***sacca desanā*** ***naya***). 

The “***vipassanā*** knowledge” which is able to discern those ***sankhara dhammas***, 

1. as ***anicca*** (impermanence) by seeing the arising and passing away of those ***dhammas***, 
1. as ***dukkha*** (suffering) by seeing the process of being oppressed continuously,  
1. as ***anatta*** (non-self) by seeing the nature of non-self which is not indestructible essence of ‘self’, can be called the real ***vipassanā*** knowledge. 

The ***meditator*** who wants to fulfil the purification of knowledgte of what is path and not path (***magā*** ***magga ñā*** ***a dassana visuddhi***), must be completed with, 

1. the  purification  of  view  called  “the  discriminative  knowledge  on  the  corporeality  & mentality” (***nāmarūpa pariccheda ñāna***) 
1. the  purification  by  overcoming  doubt  (***kankhā-vitara***  ***avisuddhi***)  called  the discriminative knowledge on the cause & results of present period. 

Because the object of ***vipassanā*** insight is the corporeality the mentality, the causes and the results belong to those two kinds of purification, which are essential to fulfil before ***vipassanā*** stage. 

**PAGE-202** 

During ***vipassanā*** practice has being take place, the object must be .. 

1. internal five aggregates sometime, 
1. external five aggregates sometime,  
1. the corporeal ***dhamma*** sometime, 
1. the mental ***dhamma*** sometime, alternately. (***Abhi-Com*-1-270, 271. *Visuddhi*-2-300**). 

It  should  be  discerned  for  the  past  ***dhamma***  and  future  ***dhamma***  similarly.  Then factors  of  Dependent  Origination  (***paticca  samuppada  aṅga***)  should  be  discerned  by ***vipassanā insight in order to attain ***sammasana ñāna and udayabaya ñā*** ***a***. (***Visuddhi*-2-244 and 265**). 

Therefore the process of ***vipassanā*** practice had been taken place alternately, on the object of the causal corporeality or mentality and the resultant corporeality or mentality, those ***dhamma*** belong to three periods, two continuums (***santāna***) and then, the generalization method also alternately, by means of ***anicca***, or ***dukkha*** or ***anatta***, with the result that the concentration associated with this process of ***vipassanā*** practice can not be situated on one object, and it is called “the momentary concentration” (***kha*** ***ika samādhi***). 

The systematic method of ***vipassanā*** practice can be achieved by only the ***meditator*** who fulfilled the neighbourhood concentration of the sensuous world or the full concentration of the world of form (***rūpāvacara***) and the formless world (***arūpāvacara***), but not by any one who lacks any kind of concentration. … 

Then it can be achieved by the ***meditator*** who fulfilled the discriminative knowledge on  the  corporeality,  mentality,  causes  and  results by  means  of  characteristic  (***lakkha*** ***a***), function (***rasa***), manifestation (***paccupa***  ***hāna***) and proximate cause (***pada***  ***hāna***), but not by any one who lacks five kinds of discriminative knowledge, systematically. 

It  can,  therefore,  be  called  the  momentary  concentration  (***kha*** ***ika  samādhi***)  in ***vipassanā*** stage for a ***meditator*** who is able to take place generalization as ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, on the ultimate reality of ***saṅkhāra dhamma***. On the other hand, it can not be decided the fact that whether so-called momentary concentration of a person who is unable to analyze the  corporeal  units  and  mental  units  up  to  the  field  of  ultimate  reality  and  so-called momentary concentration of a person who is unable to discern successive causal relationship and unable to generalize by ***vipassanā*** knowledge systematically, is true or not. 

The following explanations found in ***Pāli*** text, commentary and sub-commentary will be favourable for any one who dissatisfy on the interpretation of momentary concentration, mentioned above. 

**PAGE-203** 

11. **The momentary concentration with one-pointedness of mind** (***Kha*** ***ika cittekaggata samādhi***) 

***samādaham  cittam  assasissāmīti  sikkhati*,  *samādaham  cittam  passasissāmīti  sikkhati*. (*Samyutta*-3-279, *Vinaya*-*1-88, M-3-125*)** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Visuddhi*-1-261) one paragraph (*Mahā*** ***ik***ā**-1-342) one paragraph** 

The meanings of above ***Pāli***, commentary and sub commentary are as follows. 

The  Buddha  preached  ‘the  mindfulness  of  breathing  by  means  of  four  tetrad- instructions (***catukka***) including 16 ways in ***ānāpānassati sutta***, ***Uparipa***  ***āsa pāli***, for the purpose to attain ***Arahatt magga ñā*** ***a***. In that ***Sutta***, 

1. the  first  tetrad  had  been  preached  by  means  of  ***Kāyānupassanā***  (discernment  on  the corporeality). Then for the ***meditator*** who had attained absorption of mindfulness of breathing, 
1. the second tetrad had been preached by means of ***Vedanānupassanā*** (discernment on the feeling), 
1. the  third  tetrad  had  been  preached  by  means  of ***Cittānupassanā***  (discernment  on  the consciousness), 
1. the fourth tetrad had been preached by means of ***Dhammānupassanā*** (discernment on the ***saṅkhāra dhamma***) respectively. (***Visuddhi*-1-269**) 

(Detailed explanation would be presented in later this volume.) 

The first quotation of this heading can be found in the third instruction of the third tetrad instruction and it’s meaning is as follows: 

It should be practised for the inbreath with “the balanced mind on the object.” 

It should be practised for the outbreath with “the balanced mind on the object.” 

In above instruction, the commentator explained how the balanced mind on the object by two means.,  

1) the balanced mind on the object by means of concentration and  
1) the balanced mind on the object by means of ***vipassanā*** insight. (***Visuddhi-1-281***) 

**PAGE-204** 

1) by means of concentration 

By  taking  the  object  of  mindfulness  of  breathing,  the  clear  and  brilliant  sign  of concentration (***patibhāga nimitta***), if any one who attained the first absorption, the second absorption, the third absorption and the fourth absorption, is able to develop the concentration of each absorption successively, it can be called “the balanced mind on the object by means of concentration in the ***samatha*** stage. 

2) by means of ***vipassanā*** insight 
1) Any one enters into the first absorption by taking the object of sign of concentration of mindfulness of breathing. After emerge from the first absorption, he take place ***vipassanā*** practice  by  seeing  the  nature  of  arising  and  passing  away  of  the  mind  and  mental concomitants of the ***jhānic*** state. [It is 34 mind & mental concomitants in the first absorption] 
1) Similarly,  any  one  enters  into  the  second  absorption  by  taking  the  object  of  sign  of concentration of mindfulness of breathing. After emerging from the second absorption, he takes place ***vipassanā*** practice by seeing the nature of arising and passing away of the mind and mental concomitants of the ***jhānic*** state. [It is 32 mind & mental concomitants in the second absorption.] 
1) Any one enters into the third absorption by taking the object of sign of concentration of mindfulness of breathing. After emerging from the third absorption, he takes place ***vipassanā practice by seeing the nature of arising and passing away of the ***jhānic*** state. [It is 31 mind & mental concomitants in the third absorption.] 
1) Any one enters into the fourth absorption by taking the object of sign of concentration of mindfulness  of  breathing.  After  emerging  from  the  fourth  absorption,  he  takes  place ***vipassanā*** practice by seeing the nature of arising and passing away of the mind and mental concomitants of the ***jhānic*** state. [It is also 31 mind & mental concomitants in the fourth absorption, but the happiness (***sukha***) found in the third absorption had been replaced by the neutrality (***upekkh***ā) in the fourth absorption.] 

[Notes: Number of 34, 32, 31, 31 of mind and mental concomitants would be presented in detailed  in  later,  volume  2,  the  section  of  discernment  on  the  mentality  (***nāma kamma***  ***hāna***).] 

**PAGE-205** 

The  ***meditator***  who  is  practising  ***vipassanā***  meditation  by  taking  the  character  of impermanence (***anicca lakkha*** ***a***), suffering (***dukkha***), and non-self (***anatta***) of ***saṅkhāra dhamma***,  appears  the  momentary  concentration  of  the  sensuous  world,  called  “***kha*** ***ika cittekaggat***ā” (= the momentary concentration with one-pointedness of mind), which is able to situate only just moment on the unstable object of the mental ***dhamma*** of absorption. In this way, it can be said that “the ***bhikkhu*** is practising the in-and out-breath with the balanced mind by means of ***vipassanā*** insight. 

The  term,  ***Kha*** ***ika  cittekaggate***,  indeed,  is  called  the  concentration  of  sensuous world, which is able to situate only just moment with one-pointedness of mind of ***vipassanā*** insight. 

***sabbopi panesa pabedo manodvārikajava-neyeva labbhati***. (***Abhi-A*-2-308**) 

According to ***Sammoha vinodan***ī, commentary, the ***vipassanā*** knowledge occurring in worldling (***puthu jana***) and ***sekkha*** persons (lower three kinds of Noble Ones who had attained the first, the second, or the third Path-Knowledge) is the continuous thought process of great wholesome ***dhamma*** of sensuous world and then the concentration associating with those ***vipassanā*** knowledge is also a kind of the sensuous world (***kāmāvacara samādhi***). That kind of concentration is also continuously situated on the object of ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** by means of any one of the character of ***anicca***, or the character of ***dukkha***, or the character of ***anatta***, with the result that the opposite ***dhamma*** of hindrances (***nīvara*** ***a***) are unable to cover on his mind and the consciousness of ***vipassanā*** insight would be fixed to the object of the general character of ***anicca***, ***dukkha*** and ***anatta*** without shaking any more. Therefore, this kind of concentration is called ***kha*** ***ika cittekaggatā*** ***samādhi*** or momentary concentration (***kha*** ***ika samādhi***). 

This is the meaning of ***Pāli***, Commentary and Sub commentary mentioned above. 

The  full  concentration  (***appanā***  ***samādhi***)  can  be  called  its  name  only  during  the consciousness of full absorption appear in any ***meditator***. Then the concentration approaching to the full concentration can be called ‘the neighbourhood concentration, certainly. On the other hand, during discerning on the mental ***dhamma*** of absorption by ***vipassanā*** insight after emerging  from  each  absorption,  the  object  is  not  previous  sign  of  concentration  of mindfulness of breathing. Because of this reason it can not be termed the full concentration (***appanā*** ***samādhi***) and the neighbourhood concentration (***upacāra samādhi***), but momentary concentration only. 

In the fourth tetrad instructions of mindfulness of breathing, the Buddha preached as follows. 

***Aniccā***  ***nupass***ī  ***assasissāmīti  sikkhati***,  ***aniccānupass***ī  ***passasissāmīti  sikkhati***.  (***Sam*-*3- 279,Vi-1-88, M-3-125***). 

It should be discerned to know the in- and out-breath as “impermanence” (***anicca***) repeatedly. 

Then the ***dhamma*** on which discerned as “impermanence” are explained as follows. “***aniccanti pancakkhand***ā” (***Visuddhi***-**1-281, *Abhi*-*A*-*2-47***). 

***Pāli Quotation Maha*** ***i-1-343* (one paragraph)** 

The “impermanence” (***anicca***) is five clinging aggregates (***upādānakkhand***ā) belong to  three  kinds  of  worlds,  the  sensuous  world,  (***kāma***)  the  world  of  form  (***rūpa***)  and  the formless world (***arūpa***). Therefore, during discerning on all ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** belong to three kinds of world, called the miscellaneous ***saṅkhāra*** (***paki***  ***aka saṅkhāra***) by ***vipassanā*** insight, the concentration which situates  well on the  general  character  of those ***dhamma*** (***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***) can be called the momentary concentration (***Kha*** ***ika samādhi***), but not full concentration or neighbourhood concentration, certainly. 

**PAGE-206** 

***Pāli Auotation* (*Mula*** ī**-*1-116*)** 

The miscellaneous (***paki***  ***aka***) ***saṅkhāra*** is called all ***saṅkhāra dhammas***, except mentality of ***jhānic*** state which is the fundamental of ***vipassanā*** insight. It show that it can not  be  called  ‘the  neighbourhood  concentration’  on the  concentration  which  is  occurring during ***vipassanā*** insight had being taken place on ***saṅkhāra*** ***dhamma*** of the ***jhānic*** state. (***Mulat***ī**-*1-116***) 

Similarly, the highest degree of concentration of sensuous world, which is called the neighbourhood concentration, by means of either certainly (directly) or metaphor of same condition (***sadisūpacāra***), can be called the purification of consciousness (***citta visuddhi***) in accordance with ***Visuddhi*-2-222**. If that kind of concentration would be developed in order to discern on the ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** by means of three general characters, the concentration, associating with the ***vipassanā*** insight, can also be called ***Kha*** ***ikacittekaggata samādhi*** (= the momentary concentration with one-pointedness of mind). These are explanations on what the momentary concentration is. 

12. **The important notes** 
1. In  ***samatha***  stage,  the  highest  degree  of  concentration  of  sensuous  world,  which  is appeared  by  taking  the  object  of  four  great  elements  for  ***Suddha  vipassanā***  ***yānika*** person, is called the “momentary concentration” (***Kha*** ***ika samādhi***) by means of direct usage, however, it is called “the neighbourhood concentration” by means of metaphor of same condition. (***Visuddhi*-1-140**) 

Similarly, the highest degree of concentration of sensuous world, which is appeared by taking the object, like the noble qualities of the Buddha, of ***dhamma***, etc., can be called as above mentioned. 

2. In  ***vipassanā***  stage,  the  concentration  associating  with  the  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  of ***suddha vipassanāyānika*** person, which can be called the neighbourhood concentration as metaphor  of  same  condition  (***sadisupacāra***),  must  be  recognized  the  “momentary concentration”, indeed. 
2. In ***samatha*** stage, the matured preliminary concentration, adjacent to the neighbourhood concentration  of  ***samatha  yānika***  person,  can  also  be  called  the  “momentary concentration”. 
2. In ***vipassanā*** stage, the concentration associating with the ***vipassanā*** knowledge which is discerning on the general characters of ***saṅkhāra dhamma***, which may  be either full concentration or neighbourhood concentration of ***samatha yānika*** person who apply these concentration  as  the  basic  object  of  ***vipassanā***  insight,  must  also  be  called  the “momentary concentration”. 

**PAGE-207** 

According to above explanations, any ***bhikkhu*** as a ***meditator*** who is  

1. without attaining / developing any kind of concentration, such as neighbourhood, full concentration by means of metaphor of same condition or by means of certainly, 
1. incapable of seeing the corporeal and mental units or incapable of analyzing on those units upto the field of ultimate reality, although he is able to see those units merely, 
1. incapable  of  discerning  on  the  causal  relationship  between  three  periods  called  past, future  and  present,  by  insight  knowledge;  should  like  to  accept  the  fact  that  “the concentration appeared in him as soon as his practice begins” can not be “true momentary concentration”, actually. 

This  is  because  “the  momentary  concentration  can  only  be  occurred  either  after practising  any  meditation  subject  which  can  produce  the  momentary  concentration  in ***samatha*** stage or during practising ***vipassanā*** on the object of ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** which would be broken down the compactness (***ghana***) in order to see the field of ultimate reality in ***vipassanā*** stage. If any ***meditator*** is unwilling to develop the concentration as a ***samatha*** practice, he should like to read the followings. 

13. **The three general characters** 

***Pāli Quotation* : *Visuddhi*-*2-301* (2 paragraph) PAGE-208** 

A ***meditator*** discerns as ***anicca*** by seeing either the nature of arising and passing away (***udaya vaya***) of ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** or the nature of dissolution and perishing away (***khaya vaya***) of ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** at the beginning of ***vipassanā*** practice. However, the Noble  Path-Knowledge  (***ariya  magga  ñā*** ***a***)  called  ***vu***  ***hāna  gāmini  vipassanā***  (=  the mundane  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  which  is  able  to  emerge  from  the  object  of  ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** and lead to the object of ***nibbāna*** consequently) can not be appeared by merely discerning as “***anicca***”. Then that ***meditator*** discerns as “***dukkha***” by seeing either the nature of being oppressed by arising and passing away of ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** or the fearful nature of dissolution and perishing away of ***saṅkhāra dhamma***. He discerns as “***anatta***” by seeing the nature  of  non-self  which  is  not  indestructable  essence  of  the  “self”  (***atta***)  of  ***saṅkhāra dhamma***. During practising by means of ***aniccā*** ***nupassan***ā, if ***vu***  ***hānagāmin***ī ***vipassanā*** or the Noble Path-Knowledge would be appeared, this ***meditator*** can be said that he emerges from  the  ***saṅkhāra  dhamma***  by  means  of  “***anicca***”  which  is  the  beginning  process  of ***vipassanā*** insight. 

The  next  one,  however,  during  practising  by  means  of  ***dukkhā***  ***nupassan***ā,  if ***vu***  ***hānagmin***ī ***vipassanā*** or the Noble Path-Knowledge would be appeared, he can be said that he emerges from the ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** by means of “***dukkha***”. Similarly, it should be recognized that the remaining kinds of emerging from ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** and beginning ways of practice, such as ***dukkha*** or ***anatta***. (***Visuddhi-2-301***) 

According to above mentioned, the Noble Path-Knowledge could not be appeared by only a single discernment as ***anicca*** or ***dukkha*** or ***anatta*** but by alternate discernment of all three  characters.  This  explanation  follows  the  Buddha’s  instructions  found  in  ***Anatta lakkha*** ***a Sutta*** etc.. in which ***teparivu***  ***a dhamma***, called three rounds of ***anicca***, ***dukkha*** and ***anatta*** alternately had been preached, like the mixture of Ganga water and Jumna water. The Buddha always preaches to discern by all three characters (as seen in ***Anatta lakkha*** ***a Sutta***).The decisions found in commentaries is also the same fact that “it can not be reached to the Noble Path-Knowledge by means of a single character”. These decisions were made so as to ensure the Buddha’s instructions which is able to lead the eternal peace. 

***Pāli Quotation*: (*Visuddhi-2-264*) PAGE-209** 

The meaning of this quotation … 

1. ***Aniccānupassanā*** knowledge is able to remove the obsession of conceit (***māna***) 
1. ***Dukkhānupassanā*** knowledge is able to remove the obsession of attachment (***tanh***ā) 
1. ***Anattānupassanā*** knowledge is able to remove the obsession of view on self (***atta***) 

In order to remove like this, one kind of ***anupassanā*** knowledge becomes powerful and sharp only after getting the supporting factor of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence  (***upanissaya  satti***)  of  the  remaining  two  kinds  of  ***anupassanā***  knowledge reciprocally. The sharp, purify, bright, powerful and accelerated ***anupassanā*** knowledge of each kind will be able to break down respective obsession of defilements well. **(*Mahāti-2- 415-*416)** 

However, each ***anupassanā*** knowledge can only break down and remove respective obsession of defilements temporarily. The Noble Path-Knowledge is able to break down and remove  obsession  of  defilements  without  any  remains.  But  all  kinds  of  Noble  Path- Knowledge  could  be  appeared  as  a  consequence  of  successive  ***anupassanā***  knowledges which are full of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence (***upanissaya satti***). The Buddha, therefore, preached in ***Susima Sutta*** as follows. 

***Pubbe kho susima dhamma***  ***hitiñānam, pacchā*** ***nibbāne ñā*** ***am*. (*Samyutta-1-344*)** 

- ***Susima***! The ***vipassanā*** knowledge, called ***dhamma***  ***hiti*** which situated on the nature of ***anicca***,  ***dukkha***,  ***anatta***  of  ***saṅkhāra  dhamma***  well,  occurs  previously.  The  Noble  Path- Knowledge which takes the object of ***nibbāna***, occurs later. **(*samyutta*-1-344)**. 

***Susima*** who ordained as a ***bhikkhu*** from other ascetic person, asked the Buddha that whether  the  Noble  Path-Knowledge  is  the  consequence  of  Super-psychic  knowledge (***abhiñā*** ***a***) or not. The Buddha answered the fact that the Noble Path-Knowledge is only the consequence of ***vipassanā*** knowledge called ***dhamma***  ***hiti*** but not consequence of Super- psychic knowledge. 

Therefore,  any  ***meditator***  who  wants  to  attain  the  Noble  Path-Knowledge,  must endeavour strenuously in order to become sharp, bright, powerful, purify ***aniccānupassan***ā, ***dukkhanupassanā*** and ***anattanupassanā*** knowledge, successively. 

14. **The light of *anatta* (non-self)** 

Among three kinds of general characters, the character of non-self can be known by the time only the Buddhas appear in the world, indeed. When the Buddha who knows all ***dhammas*** by the Knowledge of Omniscience without any teacher, wants to enlighten the character of non-self (***anatta***), it would be enlightened …. 

**PAGE-210** 

1. by means of the character of impermanence (***anicca lakkha***  ***a***) 
1. by means of the character of suffering (***dukkha lakkha***  ***a***) 
1. by means of characters of both impermanence and suffering, apparently. 

The way of preaching by means of the character of impermanence to enlighten the character of non-self is as follows. 

***Pāli-Quotation*. (M-3-329 *Chachakka Sutta*)** 

- If any person says that the eye clear sensitivity (***cakkhu pasāda***) (= the eye door (***cakkhu dvāra***) is self (***atta***), it should not be said like that.  

Both the process of arising and that of passing away of the eye clear sensitivity (***cakkhu pasāda***) (= eye door) is apparent. A such ***dhamma*** possesses both the process of arising and that of passing away apparently. If any person said that “that ***dhamma*** is self (***atta***), it is the same as the fact that “the self (***atta***) of mine is both the process of arising and that of passing away”. Therefore if any person says that “the eye clear sensitivity (= the eye door) is self”, it should not be said like that. The eye clear sensitivity, therefore, is non-self (***anatta***), indeed. **(*M-3-329*)** 

In ***Chachakka Sutta***, mentioned above, the character of non-self had been enlightened by means of the character of impermanence.  

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-55) (Vi-3-18)*** 

- ***Bhikkhus***... the corporeality is not ‘self’ (***atta***), but non-self (***anatta***). ***Bhikkhus***!, if the corporeality is self, it should not be painful in this corporeality. It can be controlled in the corporeality …  

in such way that “may my corporeality be in this way, may my corporeality not be in this way”. ***Bhikkhus***! Because the corporeality is not “self” (***atta***), it is only to be painful. It can not be controlled in such way that “may my corporeality be in this way, may my corporeality not be in this way”. **(*Samyutta*-2-55) (*Vi*-3-18)**. 

In  ***Anattalakkha*** ***a  Sutta***,  above  mentioned,  the  character  of  non-self  had  been enlightened by means of the character of suffering. 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Samyutta-2-19*)** 

- ***Bhikkhus***! the corporeality is impermanence (***anicca***). That impermanent corporeality is suffering (***dukkha***). That suffering corporeality is non-self (***anatta***). It should be discerned on the corporeality which is non-self by the light of ***vipassanā*** insight, which is able to break down the compactness of corporeal and mental units. (***samyutta-2-19***). 

In ***Yadanicca Sutta***, mentioned above, the character of non-self had been enlightened by mean of the characters of both impermanence and suffering. 

**PAGE-211** 

It is because of the fact that the characters of both impermanence and suffering is apparent in the world. 

It is usually said by worldlings in such way that ‘Oh! It is ***anicca*** (impermanence)’, when  a  dish  is  broken  down,  accidently.  In  this  way,  the  character  of  impermanence  is apparent in the world. It is usually said by worldlings in such way that ‘Oh! it is ***dukkha*** (suffering), when some kinds of injuries or wounds appeared in the bodies of themselves. In this way, the character of suffering (***dukkha***) is also apparent in the world. 

On the other hand, the character of the non-self is not apparent. It is darkened by bulk of darkness for any person without eye of wisdom. It is uneasy to enlighten this character. It is very difficult to know and see. It is abstruse and very profound character in order to preach in conventional world. 

***Pāli Quotation* : (*Abhi-A*-*2-46*)** 

Two characters, impermanence and suffering, are apparent in the world whether the Buddha  appeared  or  not,  but  the  character  of  non-self  is  not  apparent  in  the  absence  of appearance of the Buddha. It is apparent only when the Buddha appeared in the world.  

**(*Abhi-A-2-46*)** 

By the time disappearance of the Buddha’s admonishments (***sāsan***ā), even powerful hermits, such as … ***Sarabhanga***, who was bhodhisatta of Gotama Buddha, were able to preach the characters of both impermanence and suffering as a concept but not the character of non-self. If those hermits were able to preach the character of non-self to disciples who approached them, the latter would be able to know and see ***nibbāna*** by insight knowledge. **(*Abhi-A-2-46*)** 

***Anattalakkha*** ***a paññā*** ***panañhi aññassa kassaci avisayo***, ***sabbaññubuddhānameva visayo***. **(*Abhi-A-2-46*)**. 

- But the way of preaching of the character of non-self to disciples is to no avail for 

any person. It is available for only the Buddha who possesses the knowledge of omniscience (***sabbaññutañā*** ***a***). **(*Abhi-A-2-46*)**. 

In this way, the character of non-self is unapparent one, very profound and uneasy to enlighten. Therefore, when the Buddha preached the character of non-self, he achieved the way of preaching …. 

1. by means of the character of impermanence, 
1. by means of  the character of suffering, 
1. by means of characters of both impermanence and suffering, apparently.  

**(*Abhi-A-46-47*)** 

**PAGE-212** 

The reason why character of ***anatta*** (non-self) is not-apparent and apparent had been explained as follows. 

***Pāli-Quotation* (*Ahbhi*-*A-2-47*, *Visudhi*-2-276)** 

The character of non-self is not apparent in the knowledge of ***meditator*** who is unable to analyze each corporeality ***dhamma*** and mentality ***dhamma*** up to each specific character of the ultimate reality of those ***dhamma***, because that of the ultimate reality is concealed by the compactness of corporeality and the compactness of mentality, respectively. 

When a ***meditator*** is able to analyze each corporeal ***dhamma*** and mental ***dhamma*** up to the specific character of the ultimate reality of those ***dhammas***, by means of characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause, the character of non-self would be enlightened in the knowledge of that ***meditator*** as really they are. 

This is the meaning of above quotations found in commentaries. 

15. **The reason why the character is not apparent** 

Indeed, the corporeality and mentality usually occur as a group called corporeal unit (***rūpa kalāpa***) and mental unit (***nāma kalāpa***). They are not able to occur singly. (According to ***Mahā*** ī-2-235, the term “mental unit” is used for mind and mental concomitants which occurring in a thought moment.) Those corporeal units and mental units are the smallest systems in the conventional truth, which are composed of specific character of corporeality or that of mentality respectively. Only when the specific character of the ultimate corporeality and  mentality  could  be  discerned  and  kept  in  mind,  by  means  of  character,  function, manifestation,  proximate  cause,  the  compactness  (***ghana***)  of  corporeality  and  the compactness of mentality would be broken down. Only when the compactness of corporeality and the compactness of mentality had been broken down, the insight knowledge can reach up to  field  of  ultimate  reality.  Only  after  the  insight  knowledge  reached  up  to  the  field  of ultimate reality, the character of non-self could be apparent in the knowledge of ***meditator***, as really they are. 

If the corporeality and mentality, which are consisting in corporeal unit and mental unit  respectively,  can  be  discerned  up  to  the  ultimate  reality,  three  kinds  of  moment (***kha*** ***attaya***), i.e, arising (***uppāda***) phase, static (***thiti***) phase, perishing (***bhaṅga***) phase, of each character of ultimate reality, can be seen by insight knowledge. The ***meditator*** can see the  nature  of  corporeality  and  mentality,  which  are  present  just  only  very  short  moment between two kinds of voidness, before the arising phase and after the static phase. 

**PAGE-213** 

***ekaccharakkha*** ***e ko*** ***isatasahassa sankhā*** ***uppajjittva nirujjati. (Sam-A-2-255)*** 

The process of arising and passing away of thought moments (***cittakkh*** ***a***) / mental units always occurs about 10 x 1011 times within one second continuously. This means the 

fact that the speed of arising and passing away of the mental ***dhamma*** is beyond compared rate. The duration of a thought moment / mental unit, therefore, can occur million millionth second only. 

Then the duration of consisting in each corporeal unit have one seventeen times of mental unit. The duration of both corporeal and mental units is so short that the ***meditator*** is not able to see indestructible essence of self (***atta***) by eye of wisdom. There are only the corporeal ***dhamma*** and the mental ***dhamma*** within 31 realms, but not others. By the time a ***meditator*** see the ultimate corporeality and mentality, the light of non-self (***anatta***) will be appeared marvelously in him. 

The ***meditator*** should like to decide that he must discern on the corporeal and mental units by means of analytical knowledge in order to occur the knowledge of non-self. The fundamental requirements of the ability to discern corporeal and mental units in order to break  down  their  compactness  is  the  neighbourhood  and  full  concentration  called  the purification of consciousness (***cittta visuddhi***), indeed. Actually the Buddha had preached in ***Samādhi Sutta*** that the ultimate corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** can be known and seen only in the presence of sufficient concentration. 

Then an account on the compactness (***ghana***) would be presented here.  

16. **Three kinds of compactness of corporeality** 

***ghanavinibbhoganti santatisamūhakiccaghanānam vinibbhujanam vievecanam***.  **(*M-*** ī***-1-365, Dī-tī-2-308, Mahā*** ī***-1-428*)** 

- The break down of compactness of corporeality by insight knowledge means that analyzing on the compactness of continuity (***santatighana***), compactness of form (***samūhaghana***) and compactness of function (***kicca ghana***) of each corporeal unit by discriminative knowledge. (***M-*** ī***-1-365***) 

**PAGE-214** 

According to ***tīkā*** ***Sayadaw*** (sub-commentator), there are three kinds of compactness, i.e,  compactness  of  continuity,  of  form,  and  function  in  the  corporeal  ***dhamma***.  No compactness  of  object  (ā***ramma*** ***aghana***)  can  be  found  in  the  corporeal  ***dhamma***.  The reason is as follows. 

The  Buddha  preached  on  two  kinds  of  ultimate  reality,  ***sāramma*** ***a***  and ***anāramma*** ***a***, in ***Dhamma sangan***ī ***Pāli***. 

**\**Pāli Quotation* (*Abhi-1-238*)** 

The  Buddha  preached  that  four  kinds  of  mental  aggregates,  i.e,  feeling-group (***vedanakkhand***ā), perception-group (***saññakkhand***ā), formation-group (***saṅkhārakkhand***ā), consciousness-group (***viññā*** ***akkhand***ā), are called ***sāramma*** ***a dhamma***. Which are able to take the object (ā***ramma*** ***a***). Then it is continued that all corporeal ***dhamma*** and ***nibbāna*** which is ***asaṅkhata dhamma***, are called ***anāramma*** ***a dhamma***, which are not able to take the  object.  The  compactness  of  object  (ā***ramma*** ***a  ghana***)  can  be  occurred  only  in  four mental groups called ***sāramma*** ***a dhamma***. 

* ***Pāli Quotation* (*Mahā*** ī***-2-437*)** 

Although different processes to take the object by ***sāramma*** ***a dhamma***, are present, if it is recognized as single process to take the object, it is called the compactness of object (ā***ramma*** ***a ghana***). (***Mahā*** ī***-2-437***) 

Therefore “The compactness of object can be occourred only in the mental ***dhammas*** which  are  capable  of  taking  the  object.  On  the  other  hand,  the  corporeal  ***dhammas***  are incapable  of  taking  the  object,  and  then  called  ***anāramma*** ***a***.  For  this  reason, ***Mūlapa***  ***āsa*** ī***kā***  explained  that  there  are  only  three  kinds  of  compactness  in  corporeal ***dhamma***. 

**[\* *sāramma*** ***āti hi vacanam citta cetasikānam*** ***āramma*** ***ena vinā*** ***appavattiññeva dīpeti*. (*Mūla*** ī**-*1-181*)]** 

- The term ***sāramma*** ***a*** means that “the nature of mind and mental concomitants 

never occur avoiding with object.” Therefore, the term ***sāramma*** ***a*** refers to only the mental ***dhamma***  and  no  compactness  of  object  occurs  in  the  corporeal  ***dhamma***  which  is  not ***sāramma*** ***a***. 

1. **The compactness of continuity of corporeality (*santati ghana*)** 

Every corporeal unit, produced by respective cause i.e., ***kamma***, mind, temperature and nutriment, consists of the fire-element (***tejo***) which is also known as the temperature (***utu***).  That  fire-element  is  capable  of  producing  new  corporeal  units,  called ***utujaoja***  ***hamaka***. It consists of 8-factors in which the nutriment (***oja***) is eighth factor. For example,  the  eye  decad  corporeal  unit  (***cakkhu  dasaka  kalāpa***)  can  be  analyzed  and  it consists of 10 factors, i.e, the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air- element.  colour,  smell,  taste,  nutriment,  life-faculty  and  eye-clear-sensitivity (***cakkhupasāda***). The fire-element, consisting in those factors, is capable of producing ***utuja- oja***  ***hamaka*** which consists of 8 factors. This new corporeal unit is new generation produced by temperature. 

**PAGE-215** 

Then  those  ***vtuja-oja***  ***hamaka***  also  consist  of  the  fire-element  and  it  cause  new generation  of  ***utuja-oja***  ***hamaka***  again.  These  corporeal  units,  ***utuja-oja***  ***hamaka***,  are second generation of the fire-element of eye decad. 

In this way, when the corporeality of each unit reaches to static phase (***thiti***), the fire- element, consisting in each eye decad, produces four to five generations of corporeal units successively. It will be explained in detail later. 

The fire-element, consisting in some corporeal units are capable of producing 3 to 4 or  4  to  6  generations  of  corporeal  units  successively.  If  the  fire-element  is  a  factor  of corporeal unit, produced by mind, which is occurring in ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practice, that fire-element is capable of producing many new generations of corporeal units both internally and externally. Those kinds of corporeality are called the corporeality produced by same temperature (***sabhā-ga-eka-utu samu***  ***hana rūpa***). 

The  nourishment,  indeed,  is  a  group  of  corporeal  units  produced  by  temperature, before  eating,  or  inside  stomach  before  digestion  occurs.  It  is  a  kind  of  32  bodily  parts (***ko***  ***hāsa***). If a ***meditator*** discerns the nourishment, inside the stomach by means of four element meditation, he can see a group of corporeal units produced by temperature (***utuja oja***  ***hamaka***).  Then  the  ***meditator***  will  see  proliferation  of  corporeal  units  successively because of the presence of temperature inside those corporeal units. The nutriment (***oja***) is also  included  in  those  corporeal  units  called ***utujaoja***  ***hamaka***  respectively  and  it  is  the nutriment produced by temperature (***utujaoja***). When the nutriment, produced by temperature is  converted  by  the  fire-element  of  vital  nonad  (***jhivi***ť***anavaka  kalāpa***),  it  become  the corporeal unit produced by nutriment and distributed into the whole body. These distributing corporeal units are called ***āhāra-oja***  ***hamaka*** because they are converted from the nutriment of  ***utujaoja***  ***hamaka***.  Indeed,  they  are  first  generation  of  the  nutriment,  inside  the ***utujaoja***  ***hamaka kalāpa***. The nutriment, which is composed in ***āhāraja-oja***  ***hamaka***, is called ***āhārajaoja***. 

**PAGE-216** 

The nutriment is also consisted in corporeal units produced by ***kamma***, mind and temperature respectively. The term of nutriment varies, i.e, ***kammaja-oj***ā, ***cittaja-oja***, ***utuja- oja***, depend on what kind of corporeal unit it consisted. Those various kinds of nutriment, in turn, can be converted into ***oja***  ***hamaka kalāpa*** up to 4 or 5 generations when the supporting factor  of  ***āhāraja-ojā***  is  present.  If  the  nutriment,  consisting  in  the  previous  ***āhāraja- oja***  ***hamaka kalāpa***, is supported by the nutriment, consisting in the successive ***āhāraja- oja***  ***hamaka  kalāpa***,  and  10-12  generations  of  ***oja-***  ***hamaka  kalāpa***  will  be  occurred depending on ability of ingested nourishment. In this way, the nourishment, ingested only once, is able to assimilate up to seven days in the body. **(*Visuddhi-2-249-252*)** 

This process of proliferation of corporeal units are called ‘the corporeality produced by the same nutriment (***sabhāga eka oja samu***  ***hāna rūpa***). 

When the ***meditator*** is able to discern each corporeal unit, which is produced by the same temperature or nutriment, one by one, the compactness of continuity within successive occurrence of different corporeal units has been broken down by insight knowledge. If the ***meditator*** see corporeal units as a single string continuously or as a firework, it can be said that the compactness of continuity covers on it. If the compactness of continuity covers on the real  nature  of  corporeal  units,  the ***meditator***  will  be  far  from  ability  to  distinguish  each specific character, consisting in different corporeal units, one by one. If the ***meditator*** is unable to reach the field of ultimate reality, it is very far from achievement of the knowledge of non-self, indeed. 

2. **The compactness of form of corporeality (*samūha ghana*)** 

If the ***meditator*** is able to analyze and discern the specific character of the ultimate corporeality, which is consisting in various corporeal units, such as 8 kinds, 9 kinds, 10 kinds of factors, etc… the compactness of form (***samūha ghana***) has been broken down. In this case, the term ‘analyze’ means the ability to discern up to the field of ultimate corporeality within a such corporeal unit, one by one. If one can not analyze the specific character of each corporeality within various corporeal units of which 8 factors, 9 factors, 10 factors … etc.., it can be said that the light of non-self will not be appeared in him. 

**PAGE-217** 

3. **The compactness of function of corporeality (*kicca ghana*)** 

The ultimate reality of corporealties, which are consisting in different corporeal units, such  as  octad,  nonad,  decad,  etc..  have  specific  function,  respectively.  For  example,  the function  of  the  earth-element  is  standing  up  for  remaining  corporealities  of  the  same corporeal  unit  (***pati***  ***hāna  rasa***).  The  function  of  the  water-element  is  proliferation  of corporeality (***byuhana rasa***), while that of the fire-element, maturation (***paripācana rasa***) and that of air-element, pushing (***samudīra*** ***a rasa***), respectively. If it is able to distinguish the specific function of each ultimate corporeality by analytical knowledge, the compactness of function of corporeality will be broken down. Without knowing and seeing the specific function of each corporeality, but unique function for all, the compactness of function can not be broken down with the result that the light of non-self can not be appeared. 

4. **Responsibility** 

The  ***meditator***  must  be  able  to  discern  the  specific  character  of  each  ultimate corporeality of various corporeal units, octad, nonad, decad etc… by means of character, function, manifestation, proximate cause, in order to break down three kinds of compactness. The  concentration  called  neighbourhood  concentration  or  full  concentration,  plays  vital important role in attainment of analytical knowledge by which each ultimate corporeality within different corporeal units could be discerned.  It is because these ***dhammas*** can be known by only in the presence of concentration, indeed. 

17. **Four kinds of compactness of mentality** 

There are four kinds of compactness in the mental ***dhamma***. 

1. The compactness of continuity (***santati ghana***) 
1. The compactness of form (***samūha ghana***) 
1. The compactness of function (***kicca ghana***) 
1. The compactness of object (ā***ramma***  ***a ghana***) 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Mūlat***ī**-*1-60*) one paragraph** 

**PAGE-218** 

Above quotation found in ***Mūla*** ī***kā*** interpret the meaning of compactness of mentally 

as follows. 

**2.17.1. The compactness of continuity of mentality** 

The mental ***dhamma*** consists of two kinds of minds, i.e the consciousness of thought process (***vīthi citta***) and the consciousness excluded in thought process (***vīthimutta citta***). 

The second kind, ***vīthimutta citta***, in turn, varies three kinds, i.e, the birth consciousness, which is the first thought moment of a life, the death consciousness, which is the last one of a life and the life-continuum (***bhavanga***) which occurs between thought processes in order to continuation of life process of mind. The ***bhavaṅga*** mind clearness occurs along with the whole life although the birth consciousness and the death consciousness occur once only in a life respectively. If it is not able to see those kinds of mind, one by one, but a single mind, it can be said that the compactness of continuity covers on it. If each kind of mind can be seen by analytical knowledge, the compactness of continuity had been broken down. 

Then all consciousness of thought processes always occur in accordance with the fixed  law  of  mind  (***citta  niyama***).  They  never  occur  out  of  the  fixed  law  of  mind.  For instance,  the  consciousness  of  the  eye  door  thought  process  (***cakkhu  dvāra  vīthi  citta***) includes  successive  thought  moments,  i.e,  the  advertence  (***pañca  dvarā***  ***vijjana***),  seeing- consciousness  (***cakkhuviññā*** ***a***),  the  receiving  (***sampa*** ***icchana***),  the  investigating (***santīra*** ***a***), the receiving (***sampa*** ***icchana***), the investigating (***santīra*** ***a***), the determining (***vu***  ***hāna***), seven times of impulsions (***javana***), two times of registering (***tad-āramma*** ***a***), called successive thought moments of fixed law (***citta niyama***). The continuation of though moments occurring in one kind of thought process is called ***vīthi***. If one can not distinguish each thought moment occurring in various ***vīthi***, eye-door, ear-door, nose-door, tongue-door, body-door and mind-door, one by one, it can be said that the compactness of continuity covers on it. If one is able to discern like that, “this is the advertence”, “this is the seeing consciousness”,  “this  is  the  receiving”  …  etc..,  the  compactness  of  continuity  had  been broken down by analytical knowledge. 

2. **The compactness of form of mentality** **(*samūha ghana*)** 

The mental ***dhamma*** are unable to occur as a single. The consciousness and mental concomitants  always  occur  as  an  associating  ***dhamma***  of  each  other  in  every  thought moment.  The  birth  consciousness,  life-continuum  (***bhavanga***),  the  death-consciousness, called ***vīthimutta citta***, and the consciousness of every thought process, always occur as a group  of  mind  and  mental  concomitants,  at  least  8-mental  factors.  For  instance,  if  the ***meditator*** with three roots (***tihetuka***, i.e, non-attachment, hatelessness, non-delusion) takes place  the  birth  consciousness,  associated  with  joyful  feeling  (***somanassa***),  the  mind  and mental concomitants of the birth consciousness will be … 

**PAGE-129** 

1. ***citta*** = birth consciousness, 1, 
1. ***aññasamāna*** = dual associatable mental concomitants, 13 
1. ***sobha***  ***a sādhāra***  ***a*** = wholesome mental concomitants, 19 
1. ***paññindre*** = knowledge, 1, 

34 mind & mental concomitants in total. If the birth consciousness consists of 34 mental factors, the life-continuum and the death consciousness of that ***meditator*** also consists of 34 mental factors respectively. 

Then the eye-door thought process, above mentioned, consists of …. 

1. 11 mental factors in advertence, 
1. 8 mental factors in seeing consciousness 
3. 11 mental factors in receiving 
3. 12 mental factors in investigating (if associated with joyful feeling) 
3. 12 mental factors in determining 
3. 34 mental factors in each impulsion (if the great wholesome impulsion associated with knowledge and pleasurable interest (***pīti***)) 
3. 34 mental factors in each registering, (two ***tadārammana***), respectively. 

Detail  account  can  be  seen  in  Meditation  on  mentality  (***nāma  kamma***  ***hāna***), Volume-2. 

In this way, the mental ***dhamma*** usually occurs as a group associating with respective mental concomitants of the specific character according to fixed law of mentality. Without distinguishing the specific character of each mental factor like that “this is contact (***phassa***)”, “this is feeling (***vedana***)”, “this is perception (***saññ***ā)”, “this is volition (***cetan***ā)”, “this is consciousness  (***viñña*** ***a***)”  etc  and  if  one  see  the  mentality  as  a  single  in  each  thought moment, it can be said that the compactness of form (***samūha ghana***) cover on it. 

If the ***meditator*** is able to distinguish each associated ***dhamma*** of a thought moment, such  as,  ‘this  is  contact’,  ‘this  is  feeling’,  ‘this  is  perception’,  ‘this  is  volition’,  “this  is consciousness”, etc …, and “this though moment consists of 8 mental factors”, “this thought moment consists of 11 mental factors”, ‘this thought moment consists of 34 mental factors’ etc … exactly, the compactness of form had been broken down in him by insight knowledge. 

3. **The compactness of function of mentality (*kicca ghana*)** 

A group of mental factors associating in one thought moment is called ‘mental unit’ (***nāma  kalāpa***).  The  ultimate  mentality  within  a  mental  unit  has  specific  function, respectively. For instance, the consciousness (***citta***) has the specific function that leading to take  object  (***pubbangamarssa***).  The  function  of  contact  is  joining  the  consciousness  and object (***sangghasanarasa***), while that of feeling, awaring by the sense of object (***anubhavana rasa***);  that  of  perception,  making  sign  of  the  object  to  recognize  again  (***punasanjānana nimitta-kara*** ***a rasa***); the volition, endeavouring to direct the mind into the object (ā***yūhana rasa***) etc… Each mental factor within a thought moment has the specific function. 

**PAGE-220** 

If the ***meditator*** is unable to distinguish the specific function of each mental factor, one by one, it can be said that ‘the compactness of function covers on it’. If the ***meditator*** is able to see the specific function of mental factors like that ‘this is the function of contact’, ‘this is the function of feeling’ etc… it can be said that the compactness of function had been broken down by insight knowledge. 

4. **The compactness of object (**ā***rammana-ghana*)** 

All mental ***dhamma*** are ***sāramma*** ***a dhamma*** (capable of taking object). However, there are two kinds of mental ***dhamma***, i.e., the observed mental ***dhamma*** and the observing mental ***dhamma*** in the field of ***Vipassan***ā. (***Visuddhi*-2-262**). In the method of ***arūpasattaka*** (mental  septet),  it  is  instructed  that  the  previous  discerning  ***vipassanā***  mind  should  be discerned by the later ***vipassanā*** mind. Then in the ***Bhangānupassanā*** ***ñā*** ***a*** (the knowledge of dissolution), it is instructed that … ***ñātañca ñā*** ***añca ubhopi vipassati***. (***Visuddhi-2-278***) 

- it should be discerned on both ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** (***dukkha sacca and samudaya sacca***) called ***ñāta*** (the observed ***dhamma***) and the observing thought process of ***vipassanā*** insight (it is predominant by knowledge) called ***ñā*** ***a*** (***vipassanā*** knowledge). 

In  the  aspect  of  observed  mental  ***dhamma***  (***ñāta***),  there  are  three  kinds  of compactness, i.e, compactness of continuity, form & function. In the aspect of observing mental ***dhamma*** (***ñā*** ***a***), there are also three kinds of compactness, similarly. It should be discerned on the observing mental ***dhamma*** (***ñā*** ***a***), in order to break down three kinds of compactness by successive ***vipassanā*** knowledge. Indeed, those observing mental ***dhammas*** are ***sāramma*** ***a dhamma*** (capable of taking object) in the field of ***vipassanā*** insight. The thought process of ***vipassanā*** knowledge (***mano dvārika vīthi***) should be discerned by means of the following methods. 

1) It must be discerned like that “this is the advertence”.., “this is the first impulsion”.., ‘this is the second impulsion’.. etc.. in order to break down the compactness of continuity. Without  seeing  the  continuous  thought  moment  one  by  one,  the  compactness  of continuity covers on it. When one can see each thought moment one by one, it can be said that the compactness of continuity had been broken down by insight knowledge. 

**PAGE-221** 

2) Then,  if  one  can  see  the  thought  moment  as  a  single  only,  it  can  be  said  that  the compactness of form covers on it.  If one can see those mental ***dhamma*** within each thought moment like that “this is contact ..”, ‘this is feeling’, ‘this is perception’… ‘this is volition’, ‘this is consciousness’ etc.. it can be said that the compactness of form had been broken down. 
2) Then, if one is unable to discern the specific function of each mental ***dhamma*** within every  thought  moment  respectively,  it  can  be  said  that  ‘the  compactness  of  function covers on it. If one is able to distinguish the specific function of each mental ***dhamma*** like that ‘this is the function of contact’, ‘this is the function of feeling’, .. ‘this is the function  of  perception’,  ..  ‘this  is  the  function  of  volition’,  ‘this  is  the  function  of consciousness’.. etc .., it can be said that the compactness of function had been broken down. 

Those three kinds of compactness i.e., compactness of continuity, form, and function, occurring in observing mental ***dhamma*** (***ñā*** ***a*** = previous discerning ***vipassanā*** knowledge) are  called  the  compactness  of  object  (ā***ramma*** ***a  ghana***).  In  the  field  of  ***vipassanā, sāramma*** ***a dhamma*** which is capable of taking object especially, is ***vipassanā*** knowledge or impulsions of thought process of ***vipassanā*** insight, indeed.  In the aspect of observed mental ***dhamma***, there are three kinds of compactness, i.e., compactness of continuity, form, and  function,  while  in  the  aspect  of  observing  ***vipassanā***  knowledge,  it  is  only  one compactness, the compactness of object (ā***ramma*** ***a ghāna***). Only when one distinguished like this the meaning of four kinds of compactness of mentality would be understood. 

In this way, only when one can discern on the object of ***vipassanā*** knowledge,** which is  called  ***ñāta***  and  the  ***vipassanā***  knowledge,  called  ***ñā*** ***a***,  in  order  to  break  down  the compactness of both corporeality and mentality by means of analytical knowledge, can he see those ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** to which no creative ***atta*** (self); the nature of non-self and the nature of dissolution of those ***saṅkhāra dhamma***, continuously. When he see like that .. he will see and understand the nature of the absence of ***atta***, which is any kind of creator by way of the following three conditions: 

1. it may not be reached to the static phase ( ***hitikāla***) of ***saṅkhāra dhamma***,  
1. the ***saṅkhāra dhamma***, reaching at the static phase, may not be decay (***jarat***ā),  
3. the  ***saṅkhāra  dhamma***,  reaching  at  the  decaying  phase,  may  not  be  perishing  away (***bhanga***). 

**PAGE-222** 

There are wanting any condition which can be created by the wish of person, being, self, in those ***saṅkhāra dhamma***. Therefore, the ***saṅkhāra*** ***dhamma*** can be called …, 

1. non-self (***anatta***) because of the nature of nothingness (***soññata***) in which lacking self (***atta***), 
1. non-self (***anatta***) because of the absence of owner of those ***saṅkhāra dhamma***,  
1. non-self (***anatta***) because of the absence of wish of self by which one can be created, 
1. non-self (***anatta***) because of contradition to the opinion of heretics, i.e, there is a creator (***parama atta***), and there is created self (***jīva atta***). **(*Abhi*-*A-2-45*)** 

In  order  to  appear  the  knowledge  of  the  non-self  it  should  be  discerned  on  the corporeality and mentality by means of analytical knowledge which is capable of break down the compactness of those ***saṅkhāra dhamma***, one by one. Only when one is able to discern like that, can he decide himself the fact that all ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** are present only beyond compare  short  moment  temporarily,  between  two  phases  of  lacking,  before  and  after,  it occurrence as the nature of ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***. Then the light of non-self would be appeared marvellously in the insight of ***meditator***, indeed. 

But some teachers were unable to accept above explanations found in scriptures, and suggested the following opinions, referring to the commentary of ***Mūla pa***  ***āsa***. 

1. ***Nibbāna*** can be attained by ***vipassanā*** practice on only one kind of corporeal ***dhamma***. 
1. ***Nibbāna*** can be attained by ***vipassanā*** practice on only one kind of mental ***dhamma***. 
1. ***Nibbāna*** can be attained by ***vipassanā*** practice on only one kind of corporeality and mentality each. 

If a person accept any kind of above opinions, all explanations on the compactness of corporeality and mentality, mentioned above, would be void of meaning. In order to criticize above opinions, about three kinds of ***vipassanā*** fields (***sammasanacāra***) and ‘partial concept’ (***ekadesa***) would be presented as follows. 

**PAGE-223** 

18. **Three kinds of *vipassanā**** **fields (*sammasanacāra*)** 

***Saṅkhāra  dhamma***,  i.e,  the  corporeality  and  mentality,  which  are  the  fields  of ***vipassanā*** practice, are called ***sammasanacāra*** or ***vipassanā*** ***bhūmi***. There are three kinds of ***vipassanā*** fields, i.e., the ***vipassanā*** field 

1) of ***Bodhisatta*** 
1) of ***Piccekabodhisatta*** 
1) of ***Sāvaka-bodhisatta***. 

These  three  kinds  of  ***vipassanā***  fields  are  explained  in  the  Sub  commentary  of ***Anupada Sutta*** as follows. 

***Pāli Quotation* (*M-tī-3-275*)** 

The meaning of ***Pāli*** quotation is as follows. 

1. **The *vipassanā**** **field of *Bodhisatta*** 

All  the  ***Bodhisattas***  always  take  place  ***vipassanā***  practice  on  the  objects  of  all ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** (corporeality and mentality) occurring in the continuum of beings of ten thousands universes and ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** of non-living (***anindariyabadda***) by means of three characteristics, ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, according to noble teachers. 

However, the ***apare*** noble teachers (the elder teachers of ***theravāda***) suggested that all the ***Sammāsambuddha-bodhisattas*** always take place ***vipassanā*** practice on the objects of all ***samkhāra dhamma*** (corporeality and mentality) occurring in the continuum of beings of 1000  billions  universes  and  ***saṅkhāra  dhamma***  of  non-living  by  means  of  three characteristics, ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***. 

Therefore,  36  x  1012  – folds ***vipassanā***  knowledge  had  had  been  appeared  in  the continuum of ***Bodhisattas*** by means of three periods, past, future and present and those kinds of ***vipassanā*** knowledge are called ***Mahā*** ***vajira vipassanā*** ***ñā*** ***a*** (***vipassanā*** knowledge of great thunderbolt). Although there are infinite beings in one universe, the ***Bodhisattas*** are able to discern on 12 factors of dependent origination, occurring in the continuum of all beings of those universes, by means of three general characteristics, ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***, 

with the result that 36 x 1012 – folds ***vipassanā*** knowledge, called ***Mahāvajra vipassanā*** ***ñā*** ***a***, would be appeared. 

**PAGE-224** 

2. **The *vipassanā**** **field of *Piccekabodhisatta*** 

All the ***Picceka-bodhisattas*** always take place ***vipassanā*** practice on the objects of all ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** (corporeality and mentality), occurring in the continuum of themselves, ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** occurring in the continuum of beings of the middle land, and ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** of non-living (***anindariyabadda***) by means of three general characteristics, ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***. 

3. **The *vipassanā*** **field of *Sāvakabodhisatta*** 

All  the  ***Sāvaka-bodhisattas***,  i.e,  ***Aggasāvaka***-,  ***Mahāsāvaka***-,  ***pakatisāvaka***- ***bodhisattas***, however, always take place ***vipassanā*** practice on the objects of all ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** (corporeality and mentality), occurring in the continuum of themselves, ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** of external beings without discriminating each other, such as, male, female, person, animal etc.. but as a general and ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** of non-living (***anindariyabadda***) by means of three general characteristics, ***anicca***, ***dukkha***, ***anatta***. 

These  are  three  kinds  of  ***vipassanā***  fields  (***sammasanacāra***),  found  in  the  sub commentary. **(*M-tī-3-275*)**. 

19. **The concept of ‘partial’ (*ekadesa*)** 

Among three kinds of ***vipassanā*** fields mentioned above, the third one determined the ***vipassanā*** field of ***sāvaka-bodhisatta*** (this kind of person will attain ***nibbāna*** as a disciple). Although there are different in three kinds of disciples (***sāvaka***), ***aggasāvaka***, ***mahā*** ***sāvaka*, *pakatisāvaka***,  the  ***vipassanā***  field  which  is  the  object  of  ***vipassanā***  practice  is  the  same among those persons. 

Some teachers misinterpreted on the word ‘partial’ (***ekadesa***) which is found in the commentary  of  ***Mūla  pa***  ***āsa***,  with  the  result  that  the  opinions  mentioned  in  page  91 appeared in them. Brief account on the concept of ‘partial’ (***ekadesa***), therefore, would be presented as follows. 

* ***mānabhañjanattham sabbadhammamūla-pariyāyanti desanam*** ***ārabhi* (*M-A-1-18*)**. 

Five hundreds young brahmas who were very proficient in three kinds of astrology (***Vedas***),  ordained  under  the  admonishment  (***sāsan***ā)  of  Buddha,  in  order  to  search  the essence of ***sāsan***ā. They were very sharp wisdom due to final existence of their lives. When they studied the Buddha’s teachings they learned easily and became less obedience to even the Buddha because of pride at their great learning in scriptures. They were impressed by themselves and looked down upon the ***dhamma*** preached by the Buddha. 

**PAGE-225** 

The Buddha who know and see the cause of destruction of their Fruit-Knowledge which had previous  supporting  perfections,  preached  on  the  ***Mūlapariyāya  Sutta***  for  those  500 ***bhikkhus***, in order to suppress their pride. (If should be noticed that the Buddha preached not the objects of ***vipassanā*** practice.) 

When the Buddha preached that ***Sutta***, the portion of objectivity in which the four great elements had been known. 

1) by worldlings (***putthujana***) with three kinds of ob’sessions, i.e, obsession of craving, obsession of conceit, ob’session of wrong view,  
1) by ***sekkha*** persons (lower three kinds of Noble Ones) with two kinds of ob’sessions, ob’session of craving, ob’session of conceit, partially, 
1) by ***asekkha*** persons (***arahants***) without any kinds of ob’session 
1) by ***tathāgata*** (the Buddha) without any kinds of ob’session, 

was preached by means of four parts which are analyzed respectively. Then the Buddha changed  the  way  of  preaching  from  the  portion  of  objectivity  to  subjectivity.  (Detailed account can be seen in the ***Mūla priyāya sutta***, ***Mūlapa***  ***āsa***, ***Majjhimanikāya***. 

As the Buddha preached like that, there is a question that whether above four persons performed different means of knowing about on four great elements only or on both four great  elements  and  the  remaining  ***saṅkhāra  dhamma***,  similarly.  In  order  to  solve  that problem, the commentator explained by means of the method of ***lakkha*** ***āhāra netti*** which is found in ***Netti Pāli*** text, i.e, way of preaching in which the Buddha preached as a common due to presence of same characters. **(*M-Com-1-32*)** 

According to  above explanation, if it is interpreted on four great elements, it should also be interpreted on 24 secondary ones which are of same characters to four great elements, i.e, ***ruppana lakkha*** ***a*** = the character of change for the worse. Then, if it is interpreted on the corporeal group (***rūpa kkhanda***), it should be interpreted on remaining 4 mental groups (***nāmakkhanda***) which are of same character to corporeal group, i.e., ***vadhakalakkha*** ***a*** = the character of killer. 

***evam rūpamukhena saṅkhāravatthukam maññanam vatvā*** ***(M-A-1-33)*** 

According to above quotation, four kinds of above persons had different means of knowing about on all ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** as about four great elements. Therefore it can be interpreted as follows. 

1) Worldlings (***putthujana***) know all ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** by means of three ob’sessions, obsession of craving, obsession of conceit, obsession of wrong view. 
1) ***Sekkha*** persons know all ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** by means of two ob’sessions, ob’session of craving and obsession of conceit. 
1) ***Asekkha*** persons know all ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** without any ob’session. 
4) ***Tathāgata*** (the Buddha) knows all ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** without any ob’session. 

In this way, there are different means of knowing in four kinds of persons. If should be  recognized  that  although  the  Buddha  preached  the  four  great  elements  directly,  all ***saṅkhāra  dhammas***  are  also  interpreted  according  to  the  method  of  same  character (***lakkha*** ā ***hāra netti naya***). 

**PAGE-226** 

20. **Difference between fields of full understanding (*pariññ***ā**)** 

***Asekkha***  persons  (***arahants***)  know  all  ***saṅkhāra  dhamma***  without  any  kind  of obsessions, as ***Tathāgata*** (the Buddha) knows all ***saṅkhāra dhamma***. However, there are difference between fields of full understanding (***pariññ***ā) of both two kinds of Noble Ones. This is explained in the commentary as follows. 

***Pāli Quotation* (*M-A-1-54*)** 

“***Tathāgata*** (the Buddha) knows thoroughly all ***pariññeya dhamma*** which should be full understood”. In this phrase, “knows thoroughly” (***pariññā*** ***tanta***) means “knows beyond compare way” by which there is no remains to know for the Buddha. Actually, the way of eradication of each defilement (***kilesa***) by respective Path-Knowledge of the Buddha is the same as that of eradication of each defilement by respective Path-Knowledge of the disciples (***sāvaka***). There is no significance between ways of eradication of two kinds of Noble Ones. However, there are differences between fields of full understanding between them. Disciples attained ***nibbāna*** by discerning on the “partial of four great elements”. However, all the Buddhas had attained ***nibbāna*** by discerning on the all ***saṅkhāra dhamma*** with no trace of the latter which has not been discerned by ***vipassnā*** knowledge. 

This is the meaning of above quotation. In this case, some teachers misinterpreted on the word “partial” which is found in the sentence, “Disciples attained ***nibbāna*** by discerning on the “partial” of four great elements”. 

Indeed,  those  teachers  misinterpreted  on  the  ***Pāli***  words  “***ekadesa***”,  and  they translated it into “one element” because ***eka*** means “one” while ***desa*** means “element” as direct translation. But when the word ***eka*** is followed by ***desa***, it become compound noun “***ekadesa***”, which is not interpreted as “one element”, but “partial”, indeed. There is very different meaning between “one element” and “partial”. 

For example, let us suppose, there are about hundred coconuts in such place. Then imagine two usages as follows. 

**PAGE-227** 

1) Please take “one coconut”,  
1) Please take “partial coconuts” .. 

There  is  very  different  meaning  between  “one  coconut”  and  “partial  coconuts”. Similarly, the interpretations of “***ekadesa***”, i.e, “one element” and “partial elements”, have quite  different  from  each  other.  It  should  be  unforgot  the  method  of  same  character (***lakkha*** ***āhāra netti naya***) mentioned above. In the ***Pāli*** of ***Mūlapariyāya Sutta***, the Buddha preached directly only on the four great elements as objectivity. According to “the method of same  character”,  the  Buddha  preached  on  all  ***Saṅkhāra  dhamma***  as  a  common.  The commentator  of  those  ***Pāli***,  with  regard  to  the  usage  of  ***Pāli***,  explained  that  “Disciples attained ***nibbāna*** by discerning on the “partial” (***ekadesa***) of four great elements”. According to the method of same character, this explanation can also be interpreted as disciples attained ***nibbāna*** by  

1. discerning on the “partial” of four great elements. 
1. discerning on the partial of secondary corporeality which have same character of change to worse,  (***ruppana lakkha*** ***a***) 
1. discerning  on  the  partial  of  four  mental  groups  which  have  same  character  of  killer (***vadaka lakkha*** ***a***). 

Therefore, the real meaning is the fact that “disciples attained ***nibbāna*** by discerning on the partial of ***sankhara dhamma*** i.e corporeality, mentality, causes and results. 

[Notes: It will be explained in detail the fact that “the way of eradication of each defilement  (***kilesa***)  by  respective  Path-Knowledge  of  the  Buddha  is  the  same  as  that  of eradication of each defilement by respective Path-Knowledge of the disciples and there is no significance between way of eradication of two kinds of Noble-Ones”. The Path-Knowledge of  the  Buddha  eradicates  defilements  with  hobbies.  However,  the  Path-Knowledge  of disciples is unable to remove hobbies. That kind of significance would not be rejected in the commentary. That kind of significance occurs between ways of eradication of two kinds of Noble-Ones. The meaning of the commentator is the fact that the First Path-Knowledge of the  Buddha  eradicates  wrong  view  on  personality  (***sakkāya  di***  ***hi***)  and  skeptical  doubt (***vicikicc***ā);  the  First  Path-Knowledge  of  the  disciples  also  eradicates  wrong  view  on personality and skeptical doubt etc.., then, there is no difference between kinds and numbers of defilements eradicated by respective Path-Knowledge”.] 

21. **Explanations of the Sub commentary (** ī***k***ā**)** 

As mentioned above, if ***ekadesa*** is interpreted as “partial”, but not “one element”, and the meaning as “partial of the all ***saṅkhāra dhamma***”, it would be corresponded with the following explanations found in sub-commentary. 

**PAGE-228** 

***Pāli Quotation* : *(M-*** ī***-1-111)*** 

- The word “only partial” (***ekadesameva***) means the fact that “only the ***dhamma*** 

occurring in the continuum of himself (qualitatively). Indeed, the meditation for the purpose of knowing the Four Noble Truths can be achieved by knowing with three kinds of full understanding (***pariññ***ā) on the ***saṅkhāra dhamma***, occurring in the continuum of himself. The Buddha, therefore, preached in ***Rohitassa Sutta***, ***Smyutta***-***1-61**, **Anguttara**-**1-357***, the fact  that  “I  designate  the  fact  that  the  Noble  Truth  of  Suffering”  (***dukkha  sacca***)  called “world” (***loka***) is only inside the body which is about one metre in height. I designate the fact that “the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering (***samudaya sacca***) called world (***loka***) is only inside the body which is about one metre in height”, etc … ***(M-*** ī***-1-111)***. 

According to explanation of above sub commentary, the meaning of “***ekadesa***” must be interpreted the all qualitative ***dhamma*** which is occurring in the continuum of himself. Those ***dhammas***, occurring in the continuum of himself are not only four great elements but also five aggregates (***pañca kkhanda***). The term “***ekadesa***” must be interpreted “those five aggregates and their causes”. 

But it should not be misinterpreted on the explanation of sub commentary mentioned above, as those ***dhammas*** occurring in the continuum of himself only, without external five aggregates. Indeed, it explained only in the continuum of himself by means of majority, (***padhāna naya***) as a result those ***dhammas***, occurring in the continuum of external ones are also included. If the ***meditator*** is lacking any kind of absorption (***jhāna***), it can be said that there is no ***jhānic dhamma*** in the continuum of himself. Thus ***jhānic dhamma*** which is not occurring in the continuum of himself, would not be able to discern for him. Then, although those persons, who attained any kind of absorption (***jhāna***), such as some human beings, devas, brahmas, are present externally, the ***meditator*** without any kind of absorption is unable to discern those ***dhamma*** occurring externally, and he can know Four Noble Truths. But it does not mean the fact that “the Four Noble Truths can be known without discerning on external five aggregates”. In order to know real meaning of ***ekadesa***, it should be read the following sub commentary of ***Anupada Sutta***. 

***Pali-Quotation* *(M-*** ī***-3-275)* PAGE-229** 

- ***ekadesameva*** (only partial) means the fact that “because inability to discern all ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** without any remains, and inability to take place ***vipassanā*** practice on all ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** by means of three characters, the discernment had been taken place “only on the partial”  of  ***saṅkhāra  dhamma***  depending  on  the  previous  perfections  (***abhinīhāra***)  of himself; (to be continued). 

[***abhinīhāra*** means the fact that both “many previous perfections” , called the seed of knowledge (***vijj***ā) and the seed of practice (***cara*** ***a***), which are leading factors to the Path- and  Fruit-Knowledge,  and  “present  nobility  of  mind”,  called  faith,  effort,  mindfulness, concentration, wisdom etc, which are associating with ***vipassanā*** knowledge in recent life, are known as “***abhinīhāra***”. Those successive ***abhinīhāra dhamma*** supports to occur the great wholesome impulsions of thought processes (***mahā*** ***kusala javana vīthi***) associated with ***vipassanā*** knowledge by means of supporting cause (***paccaya satti***) for worldlings and ***asekkha*** persons. If it is associated with knowledge (***paññ***ā) and pleasurable interest (***pīti***), every consciousness of those impulsions of thought process includes 34 mind and mental concomitants respectively. Depending on ability of ***vipassanā*** knowledge associated by union of mental ***dhamma*** within one thought moment, amounts of ***sankhāra dhamma***, which can be  discerned,  varies  in  different  conditions.  The  powerful  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  usually depends  on ***abhinīhāra  dhamma***, the  greater ***abhinīhāra  dhamma***,  the  higher ***vipassanā*** knowledge. If the ability of ***vipassanā*** knowledge is very high, large amounts of “partial” of ***sankhāra dhamma*** would be discerned. If the ability of ***vipassanā*** knowledge is low, less amount of “partial” of ***sankhāra dhamma*** would be discerned, respectively. These are the meaning of above quotation.] 

Interrogation : There is a question that whether every gentleman and lady should be known all corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** by  means of three kinds of full understanding (***tipariññ***ā) or not, because the Buddha preached in the ***Aparijānana Sutta*** **(*samyutta*-2-249- 250)**, the fact that “it is unable to cease suffering unless one is knowing by full understanding of object (***ñātapariññ***ā), unless one is distinguishing by full understanding of propagation of knowledge (***tīra*** ***a pariññ***ā) on all ***sankhāra dhamma***, and unless one is unable to give up the  attachment  on  the  five  aggregates  by  means  of  knowledge  of  abandonment (***pahānapariññā*** ***paññ***ā)”. The answer is as follows. 

The fact that all kinds of corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** must be known by three kinds of full-understanding (***ti-pariññ***ā) is all right. However, the Buddha preached that fact by means of ***sammasanupaga dhamma*** in which “all kinds of the ultimate reality included qualitatively..”, indeed. 

**PAGE-230** 

Therefore the fields of ***vipassanā*** practice of disciples are both 

1. all corporeal ***dhamma*** and mental ***dhamma*** occurring in the continuum of himself and – 
1. all corporeal ***dhamma*** and mental ***dhamma*** occurring in the continuum of external ones as a general without discriminating, such as male, female, person etc., and discerning on those ***dhamma*** by means of three general characters, can be called ***sammasanacāra*** of disciples. (This is the meaning of above quotation found in sub commentary of ***Anupada sutta***.) 

According  to  explanation  of  above  sub-commentary,  all  corporeal  and  mental ***dhamma*** occurring in the continuum of himself and external ones can be called ***ekadesa*** (partial). 

22. **Determination on the meaning of “*ekadesa*”** 

There is a question that why ***ekadesa*** would be said, instead “the objects of ***vipassanā*** practice of disciple are both internal and external five aggregates”. The answer is as follows. 

Both  two  ‘usages’  have  been  explained  in  commentaries.  In  two  commentaries, ***A***  ***hasālin***ī  and  ***Visuddhi  Magga***,  various  kinds  of  ***Vu***  ***hānagāmin***ī  ***vipassanā***  (the ***vipassanā***  knowledge  just  before  releasing  from  ***sankhāra  dhamma***).  Here  some explanations,  related  to  this  portion,  would  be  presented  from  excerpt  of  ***A***  ***hasālin***ī ***a***  ***hakath***ā. 

***Pāli-Quotation* (*Abhi*-*A*-1-270) (*Abhi-A*-1-271)** 

- In this ***sāsanā*** (admonishment), some ***meditators*** begin ***samatha*** practice on the internal five aggregates which are the objects of ***vipassanā*** insight. After discerned, kept in mind and distinguished on those objects they take place ***vipassanā*** practice by means of three general characters. Because ***vu***  ***hānagāmin***ī ***vipassanā*** is unable to appear merely practising on the internal five aggregates, the external five aggregates must also be discerned by ***vipassanā*** insight. Therefore, both five aggregates occurring in the continuum of external ones and non- living  ***sankkhāra  dhamma***  have  been  discerned  by  means  of  three  general  characters alternately. Sometime that ***meditator*** discerned on the internal five aggregates by means of three general characters alternately. Sometime he discerned on the external five aggregates by means of three general characters alternately. **(*Abhi*-A-1-270)**. 

**PAGE-231** 

Other ***meditator*** begins ***samatha*** practice on the corporeal ***dhamma*** of both internal and external-ones. After discerned, kept in mind, distinguished on those objects, he take place ***vipassanā*** practice by means of three general characters. Because ***vu***  ***hānagāmin***ī ***vipassanā*** is unable to appear merely practising on the corporeal ***dhamma***, the mental ***dhamma*** must also  be  discerned  by  ***vipassanā***  insight.  Therefore,  the  feeling  (***vedan***ā),  the  perception (***saññ***ā),  the  formation  (***sankhāra***),  the  consciousness  (***viññā*** ***a***),  which  are  occurred  by taking the object of corporeal ***dhamma***, must also be discerned by means of three general charavers alternately. Sometime that ***meditator*** discerned on the corporeal ***dhamma*** by means of three general charavers alternatively. Sometime, he discerned on the mental ***dhamma*** by means of three general characters alternately. **(*Abhi-A-1-271*)**.  

In the ***Visuddhi Magga*** ***A***  ***hakathā*** **2-300-301**, the similar explanation can be found. According to decision of those commentaries, the Noble Path-Knowledge can not arise by merely discerning on the internal five aggregates. It cannot arise by merely discerning on the external five aggregates with non-living ***sankhāra dhamma*** similarly. Therefore, ***vipassanā*** practice must be taken place, sometime, on the internal five aggregates, sometime, on the external five aggregates alternately.  

During practising on both internally and externally, the Noble Path-Knowledge can not  arise  by  merely  discerning  on  the  corporeal  ***dhamma***.  It  can  not  arise  by  merely discerning on the mental ***dhamma***, similarly. The discernment must, therefore be taken place on  the  corporeal  ***dhamma***  sometime,  on  the  mental  ***dhamma***  sometime.  Whenever  the knowledge on the corporeal ***dhamma*** are intended to be clear, the primaries (***bhūta rūpa***) and the  secondaries  (***upādārūpa***)  must  be  distinguished  by  analytical  insight.  Whenever  the knowledge on the mental ***dhamma*** are intended to be clear, four mental aggregates which are occurring by taking the object of corporeal ***dhamma***, must also be distinguished by analytical insight. (Detail account can be seen in ***Abhi*-*A-1-270,271; Visuddhi-2-300-301***). 

Those explanations, mentioned above are agreeing with the following facts preached in ***Mahāsatipa***  ***hāna Sutta***. 

**P**ā**li Quotation (*D***ī**-2-232) (*D***ī**-2-237) PAGE-232** 

**(*D***ī**-2-232) (*D***ī**-2-237)** 

In  the  noble  preaching  of  the  Buddha,  ***Mahā***  ***satipa***  ***hāna  Sutta***,  it  is  instructed directly the fact that ***vipassanā*** practice must be taken place on both internal and external five aggregates, called ***kāya*** (on the body), ***vedanā*** (on the feeling) ***citta*** (on the consciousness), ***dhamma*** (the formation-group). 

The Buddha, himself, instructed that both the internal and the external five aggregates must be discerned by ***vipassanā*** practice. The explanations, found in the commentaries, also decided that the Noble Path-Knowledge can not be achieved by either merely practising on the internal five aggregates or merely parctising on the external five aggregates. The decision in the commentaries, therefore, strictly follows the instruction of the Buddha as a proverb, “fixed condition to be tighten by iron plate”, “fastened condition to be driven in a wedge to tighten up”. 

As  a  disciple  is  able  to  discern  only  partial  of  both  internal  and  external  five aggregates by means of three general characters, the commentator explained on the ***ekadesa*** (partial). These instruction means on “the all qualitative numbers of ultimate reality” but not on  quantitative  numbers.  There  are  many  quantitative  numbers  in  a  kind  of  the  ultimate reality. Those quantitative numbers of the ultimate reality can not be discerned thoroughly for a disciple. Therefore, the fact, “partial of quantitative numbers (***ekadese***) of the ultimate reality should be discerned”, had been explained in the commentary. 

23. **Measured amount is about one litre (*do*** ***amatt***ā**)** 

Those explanations, mentioned above, would be elucidated again in order to avoid misunderstood. In the ***Visuddhi Magga*-1-361**, it is explained that if the measurement had been taken place by imagination with knowledge, the whole body consists of about one litre of  enormous  corporeal  units,  which  are  arising  and  passing  away  simultaneously  within beyond  compare  short  duration  of  corporeality  (***rūpa  kha*** ***attaya***).  Each  corporeal  unit consists of the four great elements (***mahābhūta***). If a person questions that whether the four great elements, composed in every corporeal unit, can be discerned or not, the “partial” of some corporeal units can be discerned. If the ***vipassanā*** knowledge is very powerful the large amount of “partial” of corporeal units can be discerned, while the less power in the former, the little amount of the latter. 

The secondary ones which occurs depending on the four great elements could be discerned in a similar amount of “partial” (***dkadesa***). 

24. **The field of mentality** 

***ekiccharakkha*** ***e ko*** ***isatasahassasankhā*** ***uppajjittvā*** ***nirujjhati*. (*Samyutta*-*A-2-295*)** 

- Within a very short moment, the mental ***dhamma*** arise and pass away about billion billion times  per  second.  Those  every  mind  moment  consists  of  the  contact,  ‘the  feeling’,  ‘the perception’,  ‘the  volition’,  ‘the  consciousness’  called  ***phassapañcamaka  dhamma***,  which leads the remaining mentality, and discerned mental ***dhamma*** are some partial only. Non- discerned  mental  ***dhamma***  which  are  led  by  ***phassapañcamaka  dhamma***,  are  also  some partial. It should be noted for the external mental ***dhamma*** in similar way. 

**PAGE-233** 

Therefore, both internal and external five aggregates in all qualitative numbers must be discerned in order to attain ***nibbāna***. Because of this reason the Buddha instructed to discern all corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** by means of three kinds of the full understanding (***tipariññ***ā).  

When  discerning  on  those  corporeal  and  mental  ***dhamma***,  there  are  enormous numbers in quantitatively for every ultimate reality. Because disciples are unable to discern all corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** quantitatively,  (only the  Buddha is  able to discern all corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** within billion billion universes.), it had been explained that ***nibbāna***  can  be  attained  by  discerning  on  “partial”  (***ekadesa***)  of  those  ***dhammas*** quantitatively. 

In this way, it can be understood the fact that what, how many, and which kind of ***dhamma*** should be discerned in order to attain ***nibbāna*** for a disciple. However, the next reasonable suggestion would be presented as follows. 

25. **The next reasonable suggestion** 

Those explanations on “***ekadesa***” can be found in the commentary of ***Mūlapariyāya Sutta*** which is the first ***sutta*** of ***Mūlapa***  ***āsa***. The thirty third ***sutta*** of ***Mūlapa***  ***āsa*** is called ***Mahāgopālaka Sutta***. 

In the commentary of ***Mahāgopālaka Sutta***, it is explained that if one is unable to know by means of either  

1) 28 kinds of corporeality quantitatively, or  
1) the cause of occurrence of corporeality, 

he is unable to reach the peak of ***vipassanā*** knowledge called the Path- and Fruit-Knowledge through the following processes successively, as follows, 

1) discerning on the corporeality, 
1) discerned and kept in mind the mentality, 
1) kept in mind both corporeality and mentality 
1) distinguishing and kept in mind the causal relationship of corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** 
1) discerning on the corporeality, the mentality, the causes and the results by means of three general characters alternately. (***M-A-2-163***). 

The ***meditator***, he himself, should like to suggest the fact that a single commentator, very precise ***sayādaw***, will not explain contradictory points of the term “***ekadesa***” in a single book. 

**PAGE-234** 

26. **Whether noble eight-fold path to be fulfilled or not?** 

The ***meditator*** who wants to attain ***nibbāna***, should like to take place reasonable  suggestion  on  the  fact,  “the  way  of  practice  leading  to  ***nibbāna***  which  is  cessation  of suffering” called ***dukkha nirodhagāminīpa*** ***ipad***ā. It is also known as ***Maggaariya sacca*** in which Noble eight-fold path consists, such as right view, (***sammā*** ***di***  ***hi***), … right thought (***sammā*** ***sankappa***), etc …The Buddha preached on the Noble eight-fold path in ***Dhamma cakka  pavuttana  Sutta*  (*Samyutta*-3-369)**  and  ***Mahā***  ***satipa***  ***hāna  Sutta*  (*M-1-88*)**.  Only when the Noble eight-fold path is fulfilled, can it be attained ***nibbāna*** which is the cessation  of suffering. The right concentration (***sammā*** ***samādhi***) which is also one factor of Noble eight-fold path, had been explained in ***Mahā*** ***satipa***  ***hāna Sutta***, as follows. 

**P**ā**li Quotation (D-2-250-251) 1 to 4** 

- ***Bhikkhus***! Which is the right concentration? 
1. ***Bhikkhus***!  in  this  ***sāsan***ā,  the  *bhikkhu*  enters  in  to  the  first  absorption,  in  which  no sensual desires is present, it is lacking of unwholesome ***dhamma***; with which the initial application call ***vitakka***, the sustained application called ***vicāra***, the pleasurable interest called ***pīti***, appeared in the absence of hindrances (***nīvara*** ***a***); and the happiness called ***sukha***, are present. 
1. The ***bhikkhu***  enters  into  the  second  absorption  in  which  no  initial  application  called ***vitakka*** no sustained application called ***vicāra*** are present; with which the pleasurable interest called ***pīti*** which is occurred by the full concentration, and the happiness called ***sukha***, are present. 

**PAGE-235** 

3. He enters into the third absorption in which no pleasurable interest (***pīti***) is present; with which  the  mindfulness  called  ***sati***  which  is  able  to  take  the  object  with  neutrality (***upekkh***ā) and the clear comprehension called ***sampajāna***, are also present; He feels in happiness  (***sukha***)  both  mentally  and  physically.  The  Buddha  and  the  noble  persons praise such kind of person as “the person who observes the object with neutrality; who fulfilled the mindfulness which is able to keep in mind the object; who always stays happily ..” etc. 
3. He enters into the fourth absorption in which thoroughly purified mindfulness (***sati***) is present; it is produced by neutrality called ***upekkhā*** which is free from both mentally agreeable (***somanassa***) and mentally disagreeable (***domanassa***) because of the facts that both bodily agreeable (***kāyika sukha***) and bodily disagreeable (***kāyika dukkha***) had been removed; and mentally disagreeable (***domanassa***) had been ceased in him. 

***Bhikkhus***!  this  kind  of  concentration  should  be  called  the  right  concentration. **(*sammāsamādhi*)**. **(*Dī-2-250-251*)**. 

The Buddha explained in ***Mahā*** ***satipa***  ***hāna Sutta***, the fact that the concentration of the first absorption (***jhāna***), the concentration of the second absorption, the concentration of the  third  absorption,  and  the  concentration  of  the  fourth  absorption  are  called  the  right concentration  (***sammāsamādhi***).  Among  all  kinds  of  concentration  which  are  the fundamental of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, the best kind of concentration had been shown by means of ***ukka***  ***hā*** ***niddesa*** method (a kind of preaching method showing the best things or samples).  In  other  words,  there  are  three  kinds  of  concentration,  i.e.,  the  neighbourhood concentration which is the peak of concentration of sensuous world, the concentration of world  of  form  (***rūpāvacara  samāthi***)  and  the  concentration  of  the  formless  world (***arūpāvacara samādhi***), among which the middle one had been preached as a sample by means of ***mijjhedīpaka*** method (a kind of preaching method showing the middle things or samples). 

Therefore, in the ***Visuddhi Magga***, it is explained as follows. ***Cittavisuddhi nāma saupacāra a***  ***ha samāpattiyo*. (*Vs-2-222*)** 

Eight  kinds  of  absorptions  (***samāpatti***)  with  the  neighbourhood  concentration,  are called the purification of consciousness (***citta visuddhi***). In the practice of seven stages of purification, eight kinds of absorptions with the neighbourhood concentration are called ***citta visuddhi***, while in the Noble eight-fold path method, the latter are called ***sammā*** ***samādhi***. These two usages are only synonyms. 

There  is  a  question  that  when  does  the  practice  begin  in  order  to  fulfil  the  right concentration (***sammā*** ***samādhi***) called the purification of consciousness (***citta visuddhi***) for such ***meditator***. In the ***Mahā*** ***satipa***  ***hāna Sutta***, it is decided that the Buddha preached the conclusion of that ***sutta*** with the intention by which the right concentration should be fulfilled before  the  Path-Knowledge  appears  by  means  of  ***pubbabhāgasatipa***  ***hāna  magga***.  The evidence of this decision can be found in the conclusion of ***Mahā*** ***satipa***  ***hāna Sutta***, in which the Buddha declared the fact that if the practice of ***satipa***  ***hāna*** has been taken place as the Buddha preached exactly, within either seven days or seven years, the Third Fruit- Knowledge or the Fourth Fruit-Knowledge can be attained. 

In the commentary of ***sammohavinodan***ī, it is explained as follows. 

**PAGE-236** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Abhi-A-2-113*)** 

- The phrase “this is called the right concentration”, means the facts that there is a mental concomitant called the “one-pointedness (***ekaggat***ā), which is an associating mental factor in four  kinds  of  absorptions,  i.e.,  the  first,  the  second,  the  third  and  the  fourth  absorption, respectively. This “one-pointedness” is called the mundane right concentration at the stage of mundane  ***satipa***  ***hāna***,  while  it  is  called  the  Supra-mundane  right  concentration  at  the moment of the Noble Path-Knowledge. In this way, the Buddha preached “***Magga sacca***” in the ***Sacca vibhanga***, ***Abhidhamma Vibhanga Pāli***. **(*Abhi*-*A*-*2-113*)**. 

In  ***Mahāsatipa***  ***hāna  Sutta***,  the  Buddha  emphasized  on  only  the  mundane  right concentration. However, in ***sacca vibhanga***, the Buddha emphasized both on the mundane and the Supra-mundane right concentration. 

Therefore at the previous stage of the  Noble  Path-Knowledge, a  factor of ***magga*** called the right concentration must be fulfilled. If a such person has strong attachment on the opinion that “it is not essential to develop concentration”, only Noble 7-fold path will be occurred in him. If the Noble Path-Knowledge appears during discerning on the mind and mental concomitants of the second absorption, third absorption, etc.. the Noble 7-fold path will be occurred sometime because of lack of the right thought (***sammā*** ***sankappa***). In the Buddha’s ***sāsan***ā, the evidence in which ***nibbāna*** can be attained without the right though, is present apparently but no evidence of attainment of ***nibbāna*** without the right concentration. Therefore the ***meditator*** should be decided the fact that whether ***nibbāna*** can be attained without right concentration or not. In the ***Mahāsatipa***  ***hāna Sutta***, the Buddha preached the fact that the Noble 8-fold path is essential at the previous stage of Noble-Path-Knowledge although the Noble 7-fold path can be occurred during the Path-moment. 

27. **Whether the concentration is essence or not?** 

Some usually question on the fact that whether the concentration is essence or not, referring to ***Assaji Sutta* (*samyutta*-*2-101-102*)**. 

Venerable ***Assaji*** was unable to enter the fourth absorption due to seriously fever in the  ***Kassapakārāma***  monastery  which  was  donated  by  ***Kassapa***,  a  rich  devotee.  During previous sick he was able to enter the fourth absorption of ***Anāpanassati*** frequently, but he was not able to enter it for last time, and he asked the Buddha about that condition. At that time the Buddha elucidated as follows. 

**PAGE-237** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Sam*-2-102) (*Sam*-*A*-2-289)** 

- ***Bhikkhu***  ***Assaji***  ***..!***   such  ***bhikkhus***  and  *brahmas*  called  ***sama*** ***a***  and  ***brahmas*** 

suggested that only the concentration (***samādhi***) is the essence and only the concentration is the occurrence of ***bhikkhu***. Those ***bhikkhus*** and brahmas usually appeared in mind the fact that “Aren’t we disimproving in the ***sāsan***ā?”.. said by the Buddha. 

“However, under the admonishment of mine (the Buddha), this concentration is not the “essence”. Only ***vipassanā*** knowledge, the Path-and the Fruit-Knowledge are the essence of ***sāsan***ā. You (***Assaji***) disimproved in the fourth absorption of ***Anāpanassati***, merely now, why did you suggest that “I had disimproved in the ***sāsanā*** ..?” consoled by the Buddha. After the Buddha consoled Venerable ***Assaji*** and preached “***tipariva***  ***a dhamma***” (a kind of preaching way in which both questions and answers are taken place by three rounds) in order to set up the fourth Fruit-Knowledge for him with the beginning of ‘***tam kin maññasi***” etc.. **(*Samyutta*-*A*-*2-289*)**. 

28. **The preaching way of “*tiparivu***  ***a dhamma*”** 

Three rounds of questions and answers such as, ***anicca*** one round, ***dukkha*** one round, ***anatta*** one round, had been taken place by means of … 

1. Is it ***nicca*** or ***anicca***? 
1. Is it ***sukkha*** or ***dukkha***? 
1. Is it ***atta*** or ***anatta***? 

Then clinging five aggregates (***upādānakkhand***ā) which are of 11 kinds of situations 

as follows, 

1) past (***atīta***) 
1) future (***anāgata***) 
1) present (***paccupanna***) 
1) internal (continuum of himself) (***ajjatta***) 
1) external (continuum of others) (***bahiddha***) 
1) gross (***o*** ***ārika***) 
7) subtle (***sukhuma***) 
7) inferior (***hīna***) 

**PAGE-238** 

9) superior (***pa*** ī ***ta***) 
9) far (***dura***) 
9) near (***santika***) ..  

must  be  discerned  by  means  of  three  general  characters  alternately.  That  kind  of instruction on ***vipassanā*** practice is called the preaching way of “***tipariva***  ***a dhamma***”. The Buddha continued “***tiparivutta dhamma***” for Venerable ***Assaji***, accordingly. When Venerable ***Assaji*** followed and practised in accordance with the Buddha’s preaching called ‘***tipariva***  ***a dhamma***’  and  at  the  end  of  ***dhamma***  talk,  he  reached  at  the  Fourth  Fruit-Knowledge. **(*Samyutta*-*A-2-289*)** 

“The concentration is not the essence of noble ***sāsanā*** and then it is not essential to develop concentration”.. etc. said by some persons, depending on the biography of Venerable ***Assaji***. 

Present work has no intention to say the fact that ‘the concentration is the essence of ***sāsan***ā. The writer also accepts the fact that only ***vipassanā*** knowledge, the Path- and Fruit- Knowledge are the essence of ***sāsan***ā, actually. 

However,  every  person  who  wants  to  attain  the  Path-  and  Fruit-Knowledge  and ***nibbāna***, must practise the Noble eight-fold path in order to attain the ***vipassanā*** knowledge, the Path-Knowledge and the Fruit-Knowledge. Among those Noble eight-fold path, the right concentration  is  also  an  associated  path  accordingly.  Only  when  the  ultimate  reality  of ***sankhāra dhamma***, called ***dukkha sacca*** and ***samudaya sacca***, had been discerned by means of  three  general  characters,  alternately,  can  the  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  be  appeared consequently. When the ***vipassanā*** knowledge become powerful supporting and depended factor (***upanissaya paccaya satti***), the Noble Path- and Fruit-Knowledge will be appeared at the end of ***vipassanā*** knowledge. The fundamental ***dhamma***, in order to know the ultimate reality of ***dukkha sacca*** and ***samudaya sacca***; and in order to attain ***vipassanā*** knowledge; is the right concentration, indeed. 

The Buddha preached the Noble eight-fold path in various ***suttas*** such as ***Dhamma cakka pavattana Sutta*** and it is the way of .. 

1. ***Majjihima  pa*** ***ipadā***  (the  middle  way  which  is  free  from  two  extremes,  i.e ***attakilamathānuyoga*** and ***kāmasukhanlikānuyoga***) 
1. ***dukkhanirodhagāminīpa*** ***ipadā***  =  way  of  practice  leading  to  ***nibbāna***  which  is  the cessation of suffering. 

In this way, the Buddha preached frequently on the Noble eight-fold path. Therefore every person who wants to attain ***nibbāna***, must practise the Noble eight-fold path, indeed. 

**PAGE-239** 

29. **The concentration is not ‘true *dhamma*’ in the *sāsan***ā** 

Some teachers said that ‘the concentration is not ‘true ***dhamma***’ in the ***sāsan***ā, but out of ***sāsan***ā. “The concentration, therefore, is not essential to develop for ***vipassanā*** practice”.. said by those teachers. 

It is true the fact that there were many ascetic hermits who attained eight kinds of absorptions  and  Super-psychic  knowledge  (***abhiññā*** ***a***)  at  the  time  of  the  Buddha disappeared. It should not be accused on the ‘concentration’ as out of ***sāsan***ā, whether those kinds of absorptions and Super-psychic knowledge could be occurred by the time out of ***sāsanā*** or not. 

By the time the Buddha disappeared, there were many gentlemen who fulfilled five precepts. Because of this reason, it should not be accused like that ‘the training of virtue is out of ***sāsan***ā’. 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Samyutta-3-124*)** 

In  the  ***Bhikkhu  Sutta,  Samyutta  Nikāya***,  The  Buddha  instructed  to  fulfil  the following responsibilities of the wholesome ***dhamma*** as  

1. the virtue (***sīla***) 
1. the  right  view  of  the  strong  beliefs  on  the  action (***kamma***)  and  results  of  the  action (***kamma***)  (***kammassakatā***  ***sammādi***  ***hi***),  under  the  admonishment  of  the  Buddha, previously. 

If a such ***meditator*** can accept the fact that “the Noble eight-fold path is the real ***dhamma*** of ***sāsan***ā”, why doesn’t he want to accept the fact that “the right concentration is a real ***dhamma*** of ***sāsan***ā?” 

Every gentlemen should not accuse on the Buddha and his doctrine (***dhamma***) by means of misinterpretation. 

If a such gentlemen dissatisfies to develop concentration any more and grasps on the ideology that “it is not essential to develop concentration” like a snake swallows frog firmly, he should like to question himself that “Can I discern on the clinging five aggregates of 11 kinds of situations; past, future, present, internal, external, etc.. as Venerable Assaji had taken place ***vipassanā*** practice by means of three general characters, alternately?” If he can answer that “I can not discern like that..” he should like to respect the Buddha’s instruction that it must be practiced previously ***pubbabhāga satipa***  ***hāna***, including the noble eight-fold path, before the Path-Knowledge appeared. 

**PAGE-240** 

3. **SECTION OF MINDFULNESS OF BREATHING** 
1. ***Pāli Text of kāyānupassanā ***ānāpānapabba*** 

***Pāli Quotation (M-1-70,71)*** 

**PAGE-241** 

2. **Translation of *kāyānupassanā ***ānāpānapabba*** 

***bhikkhave*** = ***Bhikkhus***… ***kathanca*** = how does ***bhikkhu*** = the practicing ***bhikkhu*** 

***viharati*** = stay ***kāyānupass***ī = through discerning as bodily constituents over and over ***kāye*** = on the body? 

***idha*** = Under this Noble Admonishment, ***bhikkhave*** = ***bhikkhus***…. 

***Bhikkhu***  =  the  practicing  ***bhikkhu***  ***araññagato  vā***  =  having  gone  to  the  forest  or ***rukkhamūlagato vā*** = to the foot of a tree or ***suññāgāragato vā*** = to an empty, secluded place ***nisīdati*** = sits down ***pallankam*** ***ābujitvā*** = cross-legged, ***pa*** ***idhāya*** = keeping ***kāyam*** = upper part of body ***ujum*** = uprightly, ***upa***  ***hapetvā*** = and setting up ***satim*** = mindfulness, ***parimukham***  =  towards  the  object  of  practice.  ***So***  =  That  practicing ***bhikkhu***  ***assāsati*** = brings forth the in-breath ***satova*** = with outshining mindfulness only, ***passāsati*** = and brings forth the out-breath ***satova*** = with outshining mindfulness only. 

Under this Noble Admonishment, ***bhikkhus***…. the practicing ***bhikkhu*** having gone to the forest or to the foot of a tree or to an empty, secluded place sits down cross-legged, keeping  upper  part  of  body  uprightly,  and  setting  up  mindfulness,  towards  the  object  of practice.  That  practicing  ***bhikkhu***  brings  forth  the  in-breath  with  outshining  mindfulness only, and brings forth the out-breath with outshining mindfulness only. 

2. ***dīgham vā*** = when whatsoever long ***assāsanto*** = in-breath is brought forth ***pajānāti*** = it is conscious as “***dīgham*** = long ***assasāmīti*** = in-breath occurs.” 

***dīgham vā*** = when whatsoever long ***passāsanto*** = out-breath is brought forth ***pajānāti*** 

- it is conscious as “***dīgham*** = long ***passasāmīti*** = out-breath occurs.” 

When whatsoever long in-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “long in-breath occurs.” When whatsoever long out-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “long out-breath occurs.” 

***rassam vā***  = when whatsoever short ***assāsanto*** = in-breath is brought forth ***pajānāti*** = it is conscious as “***rassam*** = short ***assasāmīti*** = in-breath occurs.” 

***rassam  vā***  =  when  whatsoever  shortg  ***passāsanto***  =  out-breath  is  brought  forth ***pajānāti*** = it is conscious as “***rassam*** = short ***passasāmīti*** = out-breath occurs.” 

When whatsoever short in-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “short in-breath occurs.”  When whatsoever short out-breath is brought forth it is conscious as “short out- breath occurs.” 

***sikkhati*** = He practices ***iti*** = in this way that “***assasissāmi*** = the in-breath will be occurred ***subbakāya pa*** ***isamved***ī = through keeping awareness on the beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.”  ***sikkhati*** = He practices ***iti*** = in this way that “***passasissāmi*** = the out-breath  will  be  occurred ***subbakāya  pa*** ***isamved***ī  =  through  keeping  awareness  on  the beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.” 

***sikkhati*** = He practices ***iti*** = in this way that “***assasissāmi*** = the in-breath will be occurred ***passambhayam*** = through ceasing ***kāyasaṅkhāram*** = gross physical formation of in-breath and out-breath. ***sikkhati*** = He practices ***iti*** = in this way that   “***passasissāmi*** = the out-breath  will  be  occurred  ***passambhayam***  =  through  ceasing  ***kāyasaṅkhāram***  =  gross physical formation of in-breath and out-breath. 

He  practices  in  this  way  that  “the  out-breath  will  be  occurred  through  keeping awareness on the beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.” He practices in this way that “the in-breath will be occurred through keeping awareness on the beginning, middle and end of the whole breath.” 

He practices in this way that   “the in-breath will be occurred through ceasing gross physical formation of in-breath and out-breath. He practices in this way that   “the out-breath will be occurred through ceasing gross physical formation of in-breath and out-breath. 

3. ***seyyathāpi*** = In a worldly simile, ***bhikkhave*** = ***bhikkhus***… ***dakkho*** = a skilful ***bhamakāro vā***  =  turner  or  ***bhamakārantevās***ī  ***vā***  =  a  turner’s  apprentice  ***pajānāti***  =  is  conscious  as “***dīgham*** = long ***añchāmīti*** = pulling occurs”, ***dīgham*** ***vā*** = when whatsoever long ***añchanto*** 
- pulling is brought forth; ***pajānāti*** = he is conscious as “***rassam*** = short ***añchamīti*** = pulling occurs” ***rassam*** ***vā*** = when whatsoever short ***añchanto*** = pulling is brought forth. ***evameva kho***  =  Similarly  ***bhikkhave***  =  ***bhikkhus***…  ***bhikkhu***  =  the  practicing  ***bhikkhu***  ***sikkhati***  = practices… R…. 

In a worldly simile, ***bhikkhus…*** a skilful turner or - a turner’s apprentice is conscious as “long  pulling occurs”, when whatsoever long pulling is brought forth; he is conscious as “short pulling occurs” when whatsoever short pulling is brought forth. Similarly ***bhikkhus…*** the practicing ***bhikkhus*** practices… R…. 

**PAGE-242** 

[Notes: ***Pāli Quotation*** (***Pa*** ***isam-181***) (***Mahā*** ī-***1-320***) 

According  to  these  ***Pāli***  Text  and  explanation  of  ***Mahā*** ī***k***ā,  the  term,  ***kāya***,  is translated  as  ***assāsapassāsakāya***  (=  physical  constituents  of  in-breath  and  out-breath), ***rūpakāya***  (=physical  constituents),  ***nāmakāya***  (=mental  constituents)  from  this  place  as beginning.] 

4. ***iti*** = In this way ***viharati*** = he stays ***kāyānupass***ī = through repeated discerning as “***kāya***”, ***ajjhattam***  ***vā***  ***kāye***  =  on  whatsoever  internal  physical  constituents  or  internal  physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents; ***viharati*** = he stays  ***kāyānupass***ī  =  through  repeated  discerning  as  “***kāya***,  ***bahiddhā***  ***vā***  ***kāye***  =  on whatsoever external physical constituents or external physical constituents of in-breath-out- breath, physical constituents, mental constituents; ***viharati*** = he stays ***kāya***-***nupass***ī = through repeated discerning as “***kāya***” ***ajjhattabahiddhā*** ***vā*** ***kāye*** = on whatsoever internal external physical  constituents  or  internal  external  physical  constituents  of  in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents. 

In this way he stays through repeated discerning  as ***kāya***, on whatsoever internal physical  constituents  or  internal  physical  constituents  of  in-breath-out-breath,  physical constituents, mental constituents; he stays through repeated discerning ***kāya*** as on whatsoever external  physical  constituents  or  external  physical  constituents  of  in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents; he stays through repeated discerning as ***kāya*** on whatsoever internal external physical constituents or internal external physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents. 

5. ***vihavati***  =  He  stays  ***samudayadhammānupass***ī  ***vā***  =  through  repeated  discerning  on phenomenon  of  origin  of  arising  and  phenomenon  of  arising  ***kāyasamim***  =  of  body  or physical  constituents  of  in-breath-out-breath,  physical  constituents,  mental  constituents. ***vihavati*** = He stays ***vayadhammānupass***ī ***vā*** = through repeated discerning on phenomenon of  origin  of  cessation  and  phenomenon  of  cessation  ***kāyasamim***  =  of  body  or  physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents.  

***vihavati***  =  He  stays ***samudayavayadhammānupass***ī  ***vā***  =  through  repeated  discerning  on phenomenon  of  origin  of  arising  and  phenomenon  of  arising,  phenomenon  of  origin  of cessation and phenomenon of cessation ***kāyasamim*** = of body or physical constituents of in- breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents 

He  stays  through  repeated  discerning  on  phenomenon  of  origin  of  arising  and phenomenon  of  arising  of  body  or  physical  constituents  of  in-breath-out-breath,  physical constituents, mental constituents. He stays through repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of cessation and  phenomenon of cessation of body  or physical constituents of in- breath-out-breath,  physical  constituents,  mental  constituents.  He  stays  through  repeated discerning on phenomenon of origin of arising and phenomenon of arising, phenomenon of origin of cessation and  phenomenon of cessation of body  or physical constituents of in- breath-out-breath, physical constituents, mental constituents. 

6. ***pana*** = Furthermore, ***atthi*** = there are ***kāyova*** = only body or only physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath,  physical  constituents,  mental  constituents.  ***iti***  =  In  this  way ***paccupa***  ***hitā***  =  the  manifestation  of  ***sati***  =  mindfulness  ***hoti***  =  occurs  ***assa***  =  in  the continuum  of  that  practicing  *bhikkhu*.  ***sā***  ***sati***  =  That  mindfulness  ***hoti***  =  is  ***yāvadeva ñā*** ***amattāya*** = solely for advancement of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, ***yāvadeva pa*** ***issatimattāya*** 
- solely for advancement of ***vipassanā*** mindfulness. ***Viharati*** = The practicing ***bhikkhu*** stays ***anissito*** ***ca*** = without attaching through craving, wrong view; ***na upādiyati*** = he never obsess as “ I, mine” ***kiñci*** = on any thing ***loke*** = in the world called five clinging aggregates. ***evampi*** ***kho*** = In this way also, ***bhikkhave*** = ***bhikkhus***…. ***bhikkhu*** = the practicing ***bhikkhu*** 

***viharati*** = stays ***kāyānupass***ī = through repeated discerning as “***kāya***” ***kāye*** = on the body. ***(M-1-70,71)*** 

Furthermore, there are only body or only physical constituents of in-breath-out-breath, physical  constituents,  mental  constituents.  In  this  way  the  manifestation  of  mindfulness occurs  in  the  continuum  of  that  practicing  ***bhikkhu***.  That  mindfulness  is  solely  for advancement of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, solely for advancement of ***vipassanā*** mindfulness. The practicing ***bhikkhu*** stays without attaching through craving, wrong view he never obsess as “ I, mine” on any thing in the world called five clinging aggregates. In this way also, ***bhikkhus***…. the practicing *bhikkhu* stays through repeated discerning as “***kāya***” on the body. ***(M-1-70, 71)*** 

**PAGE-243** 

In  accordance with above preachings of the Supreme  Buddha in this  work called ***nibbānagāminipatipadā*** (=The Way of Practice Leading to ***nibbāna***) the way of practice of mindfulness of breathing will be presented in successive stages as follows 

1. Section of ***ānāpānassatisamādhi***, 
1. Section of ***rūpakamma***  ***hāna,*** 
1. Section of ***nāmakamma***  ***hāna***, 
1. Section of ***paticcasamuppāda***, 
1. Section of ***lakkha*** ā ***dicatukka***, 
1. Section of ***vipassanā*** practice. 

**PAGE-244** 

3. **Practice of mindfulness of breathing** 

Among (40) subjects of ***samatha*** practices the righteous ***meditator*** has to develop concentration  through  any  kind  of  ***samatha***  practice  so  as  to  be  completed  with  right concentration called ***Samādhi*** ***magganga*** which is inclusive in the Noble Eightfold Path. 

In this work it will be presented how concentration can be developed through the mindfulness of breathing called ***ānāpānassati*** previously. 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Vs-1-276)*** 

This practice of mindfulness of breathing is a difficult way of practice which is the sphere attended by only great gentlemen called (1) the Blessed One, (2) the Lesser Blessed One, (3) the Blessed One’s sons called disciples. It is not inferior practice through which inferior persons can not develop concentration successfully. It is taken into heart through such  and  such  modes;  it  is  not  only  calm  but  also  subtle  through  that  and  that  modes. Therefore both very powerful mindfulness and wisdom play essential role in the development of practice of mindfulness of breathing. ***(Vs-1-276)*** 

In above words of the commentary according to the word, ***mahāpurisānamyeva***, it refers to only great gentlemen and this paper also agrees the fact the practice of mindfulness of  breathing  is  not  suitable  for  every  practicing  person.  Even  though  only  ***bodhisatta***  is designated as ***mahāpurisa*** (great gentleman) in some conditions, in this section of practice of mindfulness of breathing the term, ***mahāpurisa***, refers to (1) the Blessed One, (2) the Lesser Blessed One, (3) the Blessed One’s sons called disciples and then the righteous ***meditator*** might be inclusive in the list of third one. Therefore this practice of mindfulness of breathing should be performed practically. (Unless anybody is concerned with the third list, the Blessed One’s sons called disciples, it will be opportunity of himself only.) If anyone is unsuccessful to  develop  concentration  through  practice  of  mindfulness  of  breathing,  he  should  like  to change any other appropriate meditation subjects among (40) subjects as shown in section of ***samatha*** practice, volume V. 

**PAGE-245** 

4. **Advantage of practice of mindfulness of breathing *Pāli Quotation*** ***(Sam-3-279)*** 

***Bhikkhus***….. if this concentration of mindfulness of breathing is developed over and over again, it is not only calm but also superior one; it is not essential to be added again but abiding  with  full  of  bliss;  it  can  disappear  and  tranquilize  every  unwholesome  ***dhamma*** whenever it arises within a short time. 

***Bhikkhus***…… as unseasonal torrential rain can disappear and tranquilize fogs which are  floating  upward  in  last  month  of  summer  within  a  short  time,  similarly  if  this concentration of mindfulness of breathing is developed over and over again, it is not only calm but also superior one; it is not essential to be added again but abiding with full of bliss; it can disappear and tranquilize every unwholesome ***dhamma*** whenever it arises within a short time. ***(Sam-3-279,280)*** 

These  are  words  delivered  by  the  Exalted  One  showing  how  the  practice  of mindfulness  of  breathing  is  calm,  superior  and  great  advantageous  one  in  order  to  urge ***bhikkhus*** for willingness in practice of mindfulness of breathing. 

***santa-panita*** (how it is calm and superior one) 

The absorption of practice of foulness nature with the object of a corpse is called ***pa*** ***ivedha*** (insightfulness). It occurs through penetrative knowing and seeing on the object of foulness nature of corpse of oneself and it is therefore, called ***pa*** ***ivedha***. That absorption of practice of foulness nature called ***pa*** ***ivedha*** is calm and superior through only efficiency of absorption which has got powerful one-pointedness of the mind on the object of corpse. However it is not calm and superior one by means of object, due to occurrence of presence of both gross object called foul corpse and loathsome object called foul corpse. 

This concentration of practice of mindfulness of breathing is, actually, not similar to that  absorption  of  practice  of  foulness  nature.  It  never  occur  distraction  and  inferiority through any kind of indirect aspect. Actually it is very calm and tranquil, due to occurrence of calmness of both object called brilliant sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing and factors of absorption called ***pa*** ***ivedha***. Due to occurrence of superiority of both object called  brilliant  sign  of  full  concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  and  factors  of absorption  which  face  with  the  object  of  sign  of  full  concentration  of  mindfulness  of breathing, this concentration of mindfulness of breathing is superior and capable of making discontented.  The  Blessed  One,  therefore,  praised  on  this  concentration  of  practice  of mindfulness of breathing as calm and superior one. ***(Vs-1-259)*** 

**PAGE-246** 

5. ***asecanaka-sukhavihara*** 

The practicing ***meditator*** who wants to attain absorption of ***kasi*** ***a***-object has to make various  circular  ***kasi*** ***a***-objects,  earth-***kasi*** ***a***  object  etc.  That  making  of  ***kasi*** ***a***-object  is called a kind of preliminary work (***parikamma***). This practice of mindfulness of breathing is, actually, called ***asecanaka***, due to lack of any factor, making preliminary work which can accomplish  calmness  and  superiority,  as  making  of  ***kasi*** ***a***-object  etc.  This  practice  of mindfulness of breathing is a specific kind which never concern with other factor, making preliminary work etc., which is the cause of calmness. It is calm without depending on access concentration. Other ***samatha*** practices have got calmness through two factors, i.e., removing of  hindrance  ***dhammas***  and  arising  of  factors  of  absorption  during  access  concentration. Actually this practice of mindfulness of breathing, on the other hand, is not only calm but also superior one at the beginning of taking into heart in-breath and out-breath through its specific nature. 

Those ***Mahā*** ***Theras*** who dwelt in northern monastery called ***Abhayagirivās***ī said that “it was no need to add fat nourishment into this concentration of mindfulness of breathing again but it was originally full of fat nourishment; and it was flavourful practice naturally”. 

As mentioned above, it should be recognized it is abiding with full of bliss and the blissful  place  because  it  is  lacking  other  factor,  making  preliminary  work  etc.,  and  it  is available for two kinds of happiness called bodily agreeable feeling and mentally agreeable feeling. ***(Vs-1-259, 260)*** 

In this case corporealities produced by mind called ***cittajarūpa***; which are arising by taking  the  object  of  sign  of  full  concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing;  which  are produced by mind of absorption called first absorption, second absorption, third absorption, fourth absorption, are superior ones. Those corporealities produced by mind arise throughout body  of  practicing  person.  Those  are  pure  octads  with  nutriment  as  eighth  factor  called ***oja***  ***hamaka rūpa***. At that time the practicing ***meditator*** who has got the whole body which is touched by those superior ***cittajarūpa*** attains bodily agreeable feeling; 

**PAGE-247** 

It  should,  therefore,  be  recognized  those  minds  of  absorption  bring  forth  bodily agreeable feeling by means of presence of the whole body which is touched by superior ***cittajarūpa*** which are produced by minds of absorption of mindfulness of breathing. It should be recognized the fact bodily agreeable feeling is available at only the period emerging from absorption  because  the  practicing  person  feels  only  mentally  agreeable  feeling  during entering  into  absorption.  It  is  true  that  during  entering  into  the  first,  second  and  third absorption mentally agreeable feeling is available, due to associating with that feeling in those  absorptions.  However  there  is  a  reasonable  question  that  how  mentally  agreeable feeling  is  available  during  entering  into  the  fourth  absorption,  due  to  associating  with neutrality feeling during the fourth absorption. It should be recognized mentally agreeable feeling  is  available  during  entering  into  that  fourth  absorption  too,  due  to  presence  of calmness nature in the neutrality feeling too, similar to mentally agreeable feeling (referring to the phrase, ***upekkhāya vā*** ***santabhāvena sukhagatikattā). (Mahā*** ī***-1-313)*** 

Furthermore,  the  concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  can  remove  every unwholesome ***dhamma*** whenever it arises in continuity of corporeality-mentality of oneself depending  on  ignorance;  which  has  not  been  removed  by  absorption  yet,  within  a simultaneous period arising of mind of absorption itself. It can extinguish well through long lasting period abandonment (***vikkhambhana pahāna***). In other words, due to occurrence of presence  of  efficacy  to  know  and  see  penetratively  on  four  Noble  Truths  after  breaking through  the  bulk  of  defilements,  selfish  desire,  anger,  delusion  etc.,  if  one  reaches  into advancement called the Noble Path-Knowledge through cascade of practicing for attainment of successive ***vipassanā*** knowledge after making foundation of ***vipassanā*** practice as the concentration of fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing, bulk of defilements can be eradicated  totally  through  the  Noble  Path-Knowledge.  Every  fire  of  defilement  can  be extinguished through the Noble Fruit-Knowledge. 

This is the essence of above ***Pāli*** Text. ***(Vs-1-259, 260)*** 

6. **The foundation stage of practice of mindfulness of breathing *Pāli Quotation*** ***(Sam-3-280, M-1-70, Vi-1-88)*** 

Under this Noble Admonishment, ***bhikkhus***…. the practicing ***bhikkhu*** having gone to the forest or to the foot of a tree or to an empty, secluded place sits down cross-legged, keeping  upper  part  of  body  uprightly,  and  setting  up  mindfulness,  towards  the  object  of practice.  That  practicing  ***bhikkhu***  brings  forth  the  in-breath  with  outshining  mindfulness only, and brings forth the out-breath with outshining mindfulness only. ***(Sam-3-280, M-1-70, Vs-1-88)*** 

**PAGE-248** 

These words, “having gone to the forest or to the foot of a tree or to an empty, secluded  place”,  are  instructions  for  the  ***bhikkhu***  who  wants  to  perform  practice  of mindfulness  of  breathing  in  order  to  find  favourable  place  for  the  development  of concentration through mindfulness of breathing. This ***bhikkhu***’s mind which has long been dissipated among various kinds of objects, visible objects, auditory objects etc., does not want to mount the object of concentration-through-mindfulness-of-breathing; it runs off the track like a chariot harnessed to a wild ox. 

Now suppose a cowherd wanted to tame a wild calf that had been reared on a wild cow’s milk, he would take it away from the cow and tie it up apart with a rope to a stout post dug into the ground; then the calf might dash to and fro, but being unable to get away, it would eventually sit down or lie down by the post, so too, when a ***bhikkhu*** wants to tame his own mind which has long been spoilt by being reared on various kinds of objects, visible-objects etc., as object for its food and drink, he should take it away from various objects, visible object etc., and having gone into the forest or to the foot of a tree or to an empty, secluded place  and  tie  his  mind  up  to  the  post  of  in-breaths  and  out-breaths  with  the  rope  of mindfulness. And so his mind may then dash to and fro when it no longer gets the objects which was formerly used to, but being unable to break the rope of mindfulness and get away, it sits down, lies down, by that object under the influence of access and full absorptions. Hence the Ancients said: 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Vs-1-261, Vi-A-2-12, Dī-A-2-353, M-A-1-252)*** 

“Just as a man who tames a stupid calf would tie it to a post, so here “should his wandering mind by mindfulness be firmly to the object tied.” 

**PAGE-249** 

7. **In other words** 

In other words, this practice of mindfulness of breathing is foremost among various kinds  of  meditation  subjects.  It  is  proximate  cause  for  attainment  of  the  supra-mundane ***dhammas*** called the Noble Path-Knowledge and Fruit-Knowledge of all the Perfectly Self- enlightened Ones, some Lesser Buddhas and some disciples of the Perfectly Self-enlightened One. For those Noble Ones who have got the supra-mundane ***dhammas*** called the Noble Path-Knowledge and Fruit-Knowledge through performing ***vipassanā*** practice after making any kind of meditation subjects other than practice of mindfulness of breathing as foundation of  ***vipassanā***  practice,  this  practice  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  is  a  basis  for  attaining distinction an abiding in bliss here and now. It is not easy to develop without leaving the neighbourhood of villages, which resound with the noises of women, men, elephants, horses, etc. It is because noise being a thorn to absorption ***(saddaka***  ***akattā*** ***jhānassa)***. 

Actually in the forest away from any village a practicing ***bhikkhu*** can keep in mind this practice of mindfulness of breathing and brings  forth the fourth absorption with the object of in-breaths and out-breaths; and then he can reach the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant, the  highest  fruit  through  discerning  as  three  general  characters  on  conditioned  things occurring in three realms. That is why the Blessed One said “gone to the forest” etc., in pointing out a favourable bode for practicing ***bhikkhu***. (***Vs-1-261***) 

It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ The Blessed One is like a master of the art of building sites. As the master of the art of building sites surveys the proposed site for a town, thoroughly examines it, and then gives his directions ‘Build the town here’, and when the town is safely finished, he receives great honour from the royal family, so the Blessed One examines an abode as to its suitability for practicing ***bhikkhu***, and he directed “Develop yourself for the advancement of practice in this forest etc.” Afterwards when the practicing ***bhikkhu*** reached into the Noble Fruit-Knowledge  of  Arahant  through  cascade  of  three  noble  teachings  called  virtue- concentration-wisdom he gives homage respectfully to the Blessed One with saying that “The Blessed One is, indeed, Perfectly Self-enlightened One who knows and sees every Noble Truth ***dhamma*** penetratively, as it really is”. Thus the Blessed One received great honour. ***(Vs-1-261)*** 

**PAGE-250** 

8. **The noblest worship** 

At the night of fullmoon day of Kason, 148 Buddhist Era, the Blessed One laid down on his right side, nobly like a lion), placing the left foot on and a little beyond the right one, with mindfulness and deliberation, on the couch laid out northward for the head between the pair of Sal trees inside Sal Grove of the Malla princes at the road-bend leading to ***Kusinārā*** town. 

At that time, the twin Sal trees blossomed forth all over, though it was out of season. Furthermore, all kinds of trees not only inside Sal Grove of the Malla princes but all tree which were flowering ones within ten thousands cosmological systems existing in infinite numbers in the universes also rained blossoms; every tree which was fructiferous one brought forth fruits; Blossoms of the sacred lotus were brought forth on the stems, branches of all trees; on creepers; in the sky; on the ground respectively; all great oceans were covered with (5) coloured blossoms of the sacred lotus; the mountain range of Himalaya which is broad about (3) thousands ***yojana*** (= one ***yojana*** equals to about 12.72 miles.) was very delightful place as bundle of peacock tail feathers which were tied up tightly; as clumps of bushes with flowers  which  were  adjacent  to  each  other  without  any  space;  as  festoons  which  were bundled tightly; as a round bamboo tray with full of flowers.  

Those  twin  Sal  trees  with  foliages  shaken  by  dryads  rained  blossoms;  scattered, strewn, spread blossoms all over the body of the Blessed One so as to worship to the Blessed One. Celestial ***mandārava*** flowers fell from the air above, being scattered, strewn and spread all over the body of the Blessed One, in reverence to him. And in reverence to the Blessed One, celestial sandalwood powder fell from the air above, being scattered, strewn and spread all over the body of the Blessed One. And in reverence to the Blessed One, celestial music sounded in the air above. And in reverence to the Blessed One, celestial songs which were produced by taking object of wisdom of the Blessed One arose in the air above. 

At that time the Exalted One said to the Venerable Ā***nanda*** as follows: 

**PAGE-251** 
PAGE39
