***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**THE CONCENTRATION SHOULOD BE DEVELOPED** 

**VOLUME I SECTION 2 Page 300 – 350** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiţakadhara*)** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE41

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

PAGE 300 

*Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa* 

18. *upat* *t* *hānam*  *sati* = fixed situation of the mindfulness 

***upat***  ***t*** ***h***     ***ānam******     ***satī**ti tam*  *āramman* *am*  *upecca tit* *t* *hatīti sati upat* *t* *hānam*  *nāma*. ( *Patịsam-*Com- 2-107) 

***upat***  ***t*** ***h***     ***ānam******    ***s*** ***atī**ti āramman* *am*  *upagantvā tit* *t* *hatīti sati upat* *t* *hānam*  *nāma*.(*Mahāt ī*-1-319) 

The meaning of  ***upatt***     ***h***   ***ānam***     ***sati*** ( the mindfulness is called *upat* *t* *hāna*) is that — “due to ability to fix on that object called sign of full concentration ( sign of neighbourhood  concentration),  the  mindfulness  (*sati*)  is  called  *upat* *t* *hānam* ”.  It  can  be  said  that  the mindfulness is fixedly situated on the object. 

[**Notes**: Explanation on sign of neighbourhood  concentration will be presented later.] 

19. *anupassanāñān* *am**  = repeated discerning is known as knowledge 

*kāyoti dve kāyā nāmakāyo ca rūpakāyo ca*. (*Patịsam-*181) 

*anupassanā  ñān* *anti  samathavasena  nimittakāyānupassanā*,  *vipassanāvasena nāmakāyarūpakāyānupassanā ñān* *anti attho*.* (*Patịsam-*Com-2-107) 

*anupassanā  ñān* *anti  samathavasena  nimittassa  anupassanā*,  *vipassanāvasena assāsapassāse*, *tannissayañca kāyam*  “*rūpa*”*nti*, *cittam*  *tams* *ampayuttadhamme ca* “*arūpa*”*nti vavatthapettvā nāmarūpassa anupassanā ca ñān* *am* , *tattha yathābhūtāvabodho*. (*Mahāt* *ī*-1- 320) 

The meaning of ***anupassanāñāna****     is that - in the aspect of *samatha* stage, repeated discerning  on  sign  of  full-concentration  is  known  as  *anupassanāñān* *a.*  In  the  aspect  of 

*vipassanā* stage, the knowledge by which repeated discerning and taking into heart these corporeal and mental *dhamma*, 

1. *assāsapassāsakāya* which is called all kinds of corporealities consisting in a group 

of sound nonads produced by mind (*cittajanavaka kalāpa*s ) which are occurring in the whole in-breath and out-breath, 

**PAGE 301** 

2. *karajakāya* which is called all kinds of corporealities including primary (underived 

)and secondary (derived) corporealities on which *assāsapassāsakāya* is dependent, 

3. *nāmakāya*  which  is  called  all  kinds  of  mentalities  including  mind  and  mental 

concomitants  which  are  occurring  by  taking  the  object  of  *rūpakāya*  including  those *assāsapassāsakāya* and *karajakāya*, is called *anupassanān ān a.* It is penetrative knowledge on those corporeal and mental *dhamma* correctly indeed. ( *Patịsam-*Com-2-107, *Mahāt ī*-1-320) 

According  to  explanations  found  in  these  Pāl i,  commentary  and  sub-commentary, although the foundation stage of the practice consists of *assāsapassāsakāya* only, three kinds of *kāya*, i.e., *assāsapassāsakāya, rūpakāya, nāmakāya,* can be found in later stages of both *samatha* and *vipassanā* . It should, therefore, be recognized the fact that the *kāya* found in *kāyānupassanā satipat t hāna* means all kinds of corporeal and mental *dhamma*. It should be read the following explanations. 

20. *kāya* is called *upat t hāna* but not *sati* 

*kāyo  upat* *t* *hānanti  so  kāyo  āramman* *akaran* *avasena  upagantvā  sati  ettha  tit* *t* *hatīti upat* *t* *hānam*   *nāma*.  *ettha  ca*  “*kāyoupat* *t* *hāna*”*nti  iminā  itarakāyassāpi  sańgaho  hoti yathāvuttasammasanasārassāpi idha icchitattā*. *no satīti so kāyo sati nāma na hoti*. (*Mahāt ī*- 1-320) 

- *rūpakāya*  includes  *assāsapassāsakāya*  and  it's  dependence  corporealities  called 

*karajakāya* which are un-derived and derived corporealities. Those mental *dhammas* which occur by taking the objects of that *rūpakāya* are called *nāmakāya*. Due to fixability of the mindfulness on these *rūpakāya* and *nāmakāya* by means of taking the object of the latter, those *rūpakāya* and *nāmakāya*, the situation of the mindfulness, are known as *upat t hāna .* In this case, with regarding to the Pāl i Text, the word *kāyoupat t ānam* should not be interpreted on *rūpakāya* only but on both *rūpa-* and *nāmakāya* collectively. It is because the field of three   general  characters,  i.e.,  *rūpakāya*  and  *nāmakāya*,  which  is  all  known  as *sammasanacāra dhamma*, is intended to be essential in this case. However, it should be recognized the fact that those *kāya* is called *kāya* due to the situation of the mindfulness only and they, themselves, are not fixability on the like the mindfulness resulting it can not be called *sati*. (*Mahāt ī*-1-320) 

*sati upat* *t* *hānañceva sati ca saran* *at* *t* *hena upatit* *t* *hanat* *t* *hena ca*. ( *Mahāt ī*-1-320) 

Due to fixability of the mindfulness on the object of sign of concentration in the aspect of *samatha* stage, that of the mindfulness on the object of *rūpa-* and *nāmakāya* in the aspect of *vipassanā* stage, and due to occurrence of previous mindfulness which is the fixable situation of the succeeding mindfulness, the mindfulness is called not only *upat t hāna* but also *sati*.(*Mahāt* *ī*-1-320) 

***PAGE 302*** 

21. *tam*  *kāyam*  *anupassati* 

In the words, “that *kāya* is discerned by that mindfulness and knowledge”, there are questionable for a wise that “which is that *kāya*?” “how that *kāya* be discerned?” etc. It is explained in the commentary of *Pat isambhidā Magga* as follows. 

***tam******     ***kāyam******     ***anupassatī**ti  samathavipassanāvasena  yathāvuttam*   *kāyam*   *anugantvā jhānasampayuttañān* *ena vā vipassanāñān* *ena vā passati*. ( *Pat isam*-Com-2-108) 

In the aspect of *samatha* stage, the practicing ***meditator*** discerns repeatedly on very bright sign of full concentration which is representative of in- and out-breath and touching place so-called *assāsapassāsa nimitta kāya*, by means of the knowledge associating with the absorption (*jhāna*). 

[In  the  tetrad  method,  there  are  34  mind  and  mental  concomitants  in  the  first absorption of *ānāpānassati* (mindfulness of breathing ), while 32,31,31 mind and mental concomitants in the second, third and fourth absorption, respectively. Those mind and mental concomitants occur simultaneously within one mind moment (*cittakkhan a*). Among those mind and mental concomitants, the knowledge called *paññindare* is also included. That kind of mental concomitant is the knowledge associating with absorption, which is called the right view of the absorption( *jhāna-sammādit   t hi* ). It should be recognized the fact that in the *samatha* stage, repeated discerning on the sign of full concentration of *ānāpānassati* by that knowledge  is  known  as  ***kāyānupassanā  satipat t hānabhāvanā***].  It  can  be  seen  in  tables shown in Section 5, *nāmakammat t hāna*. 

In  the  aspect  of  *vipassanā*  stage,  the  practicing  ***meditator***  discerns  repeatedly  on *r pakāya*,  i.e.,  in-breath,  out-breath  and  *karajakāya*,  and  all  kinds  of  mentalities  called 

*nāmakāya* associating with their causes, by means of three general characters alternatively, i.e., impermanence (*anicca)*, suffering (*dukkha*), non-self (*anatta*) which are called *vipassanā* knowledge. It should be recognized the fact that in the *vipassanā* stage, repeated discerning on those *r pakāya* and *nāmakāya* associating with their causes by *vipassanā* knowledge is 

known as ***kāyānupassanā satipat***   ***t*** ***h******      ***ānabhāvanā***. 

22. An important assumption 

Some noble teachers assume that ‘repeated discerning on the corporeal *dhamma* only is called *kāyānupassanāsatipat t hāna’*. They misunderstand on *kāyānupassanāsatipat t hāna* by 

which only corporeal *dhamma* would be discerned. They have no desire to accept explanation of  the  word,  found  in  commentaries,  i.e.,  *mukhena*  (beforehand)which  can  be  seen  in *Mijjhima*-Com-1-245 as follows, 

1. *kāyānupassanāmukhena* 
1. *vedanānupassanāmukhena* 
1. *cittānupassanāmukhena* 
1. *dhammānupassanāmukhena* (*M-Com-1-245*). 

It would be presented on the explanations relating to this fact in accordance with the commentary of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga*. In order to understand clearly – it would be presented previously  Pāl i  text  found  in  *Pat* *isambhidā  Magga*  which  explains  on  original  words 

(*samvan n etabbapada*). 

**PAGE 303** 

*tāya satiyā tena ñān* *ena tam*  *kāyam*  *anupassati*, *tena vuccati  kāye kāyānupassanā satipat* *t* *hānabhāvanāti*. (*Pat* *isam*-175) 

English translation of this Pāl i has been presented previously. However, it will be presented again in order to remember interpretation as follows. 

That *kāya* is discerned repeatedly by that mindfulness and knowledge. It, therefore, is called *kāyānupassanā satipat t hānabhāvanā.* 

In above Pāl i quotation  the meaning of “*tam*  *kāyam*  (that *kāya* )” has been explained previously ( *See* section 3.2.21, PAGE 302 ). In the commentary of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga*, it is explained in detail the fact that “it must be understood on the word *kāya* as both *r pa* and 

*nāmakāya*”, as follows. 

***tam******    ***k***  ***āya**nti aniddit* *t* *hepi nāmarūpakāye kāyasaddena tassāpi sańgahitattā niddit* *t* *ham*  *viya katvā vuttam* . *aniccānupassanādayo hi nāmarūpakāye eva labbhanti*, *na nimittakāye*. 

(*Pa t* *isam*-Com-2-108) 

[The meaning of above Pāl i quotation is as follows.] 

In the Pāl i Text of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga*, it is preached that — 

*anupassatīti  katham*   *tam*   *kāyam*   *anupassati*,  *aniccato  anupassati*,  *no  niccato*  …* (*Patisam*-175,176) 

=In  the  word  ***anupassati***  (repeatedly  discern),  how  that  *kāya*  would  be  discerned repeatedly? It would be discerned repeatedly by means of *anicca*(impermanence) but not by means  of  *nicca*(permanence),preached  in  *Pat* *isambhidā  Magga*  like  this  only.  It  is  not explained  in  detail  on  the  *kāya*  which  must  be  discerned  by  three  general  characters. Although it is not explained on the word *kāya*, it had been preached on the grammatical usage of *kāya* which is well understand to interpret both *rūpakāya* and *nāmakāya*  commonly. It is right — discerning of three general , such as, *aniccānupassanā*, etc. can be performed on the object  of  *rūpakāya*  and  *nāmakāya*  only,  but  not  on  the  sign  of  full concentration(*pat* *ibhāganimitta* ) which is called *ānāpānanimittak*āya. 

This is the meaning of above explanation found in the commentary of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga*. This explanation is the same as Pāl i Text of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga* which will be expressed continuously. 

**PAGE 304** 

According to this instruction found in commentary, the ***meditator*** who is practicing mindfulness  of  breathing  must  discern  three  kinds  of  signs,  i.e.,  sign  of  preliminary- concentration( *parikamma nimitta*), sign of neighbourhood -concentration (*uggaha nimitta*), sign of full concentration (*patibhāga nimitta*), which are called *assāsapassāsa nimitta kāya* in the  *samatha*  stage.  In  the  *vipassanā*  stage,  however,  *r pakāya*  and  *nāmakāya*  must  be 

discerned by means of three general characters alternatively. If he discerns like that it must be recognized that he is well practicing on *kāyānupassanā satipat t hāna bhāvanā*. It, therefore, should be recognized the fact that *kāyānupassanā satipat t hāna* is not a practice to discern corporeal *dhamma* only, but a way of practice to discern corporeal *dhamma* beforehand and then all *sańkhāra dhamma* must be discerned systematically. If the practicing ***meditator*** is not satisfied to accept this explanation yet, it should be continued to read the preaching found in 

*Pat isambhidā Magga* as follows. 

23. The preaching found in *Pat isambhidā Magga*** 

*kāyoti dve kāyā nāmakāyo ca rūpakāyo ca*. *katamo nāmakāyo vedanā saññā cetanā phasso manasikāro*. *nāmñca nāmakāyo ca*, *ye ca vuccanti cittasańkhārā*, *ayam*  *nāmakāyo*. *katamo rūpakāyo*, *cattāro ca mahābhūtā catunnañca mahābhūtānam*  *upādūyarūpam*  *assāso ca  passāso  ca  nimittañca  upanibandhanā  ye  ca  vuccanti  kāyasańkhārā*,  *ayam*   *rūpakāyo*. 

(*Pat isam*-181) 

*cetanādīhi  sańkhārakkhandho  vutto*.  *evam*   *tīsu  khandhesu  vuttesu  tam* *nissayo viññān* *akkhandho vuttova hoti*. (*Pat isam*-Com-2-112) 

*aniccanti kim*  *aniccam* . *Pañcakkhandhā aniccā*. (*Pat isam*-191) 

Above Pāl i quotations express interpretation of the word, ***kāya***, which is containing in the phrase, ‘*sabbakāyapats am* *vedī* ’, the third instruction of the first tetrad instructions of 

mindfulness of breathing. the meaning of those quotations are as follows. 

In the section of *kāyānupassanā satipat t hāna* the *kāya* means two kinds of *kāya*, i.e., 

1. *nāmakāya* = all kinds of mental *dhamma*, 
1. *r pakāya* = all kinds of corporeal *dhamma*, indeed. 

Which is *nāmakāya*? 

Those *dhamma*, the contact (*phassa*), the feeling (*vedanā*), the perception*( san n ā*), the volition (*cetanā*), the attention (*manasīkāra*), etc. or all mental *dhamma* called *nāma*, the feeling, the perception called *cittasańkhāra*, are determined as *nāmakāya*. 

[With regarding to this explanation, it means that four mental aggregates, i.e., feeling- group, perception-group, formation-group, and consciousness-group are known as *nāmakāya*. 

Which is *r pakāya*? 

**PAGE 305** 

These *sańkhāra dhamma*, 

1. the four great elements 
1. twenty four kinds of derived corporealities which are occurring depending on the four great elements ( see *Pats* *am*-Com-2-112) 
1. in-breath and out-breath 
1. sign  of  full-concentration  (*pat* *i* *bhāga  nimitta*),(including  sign  of  preliminary  and 

neighbourhood  concentration)  which  is  associated  with  in-breath  and  out-breath, which are called *kāyasańkhāra*,are determined as *rūpakāya*.(*Pat* *isam*-181) 

Then  in  the  Pāl i  Text  of  *Pat* *isambhidā  Magga*,  it  is  preached  the  fact  that  ‘five aggregates are impermanent’(***pañcakkhandhā aniccā***) and it shows the object of *vipassanā* practice by means of *anicca* with regarding to the word, *aniccānupassī*, which is including in the fourth tetrad instructions of mindfulness of breathing. 

Therefore  those  practising  ***meditators***  who  want  to  attain  *nibbāna*  should  be recognized strongly the fact that above explanations of commentary and sub-commentary, that 

1. *asāsapassāsa kāya*, 
1. *r pa kāya*, 
1. *nāmakāya*,  are  known  as  *kāya*  in  the  section  of  *kāyānupassanā  satipat* *t* *hāna*, 

correspond to the Pāl i of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga*, like a mixture of water and milk in a cup, indeed. 

24. The way of practice to be continued 

I  would be presented  the  way  of practice  of  mindfulness  of breathing.  When  the mindfulness fixed with the in-breath and out-breath, it should be tried to know length of in- and out-breath continuously. 

*yā pana tesam*  *dīgharassatā*, *sā addhānavasena* *veditabbā* (*Visuddhi-*1-263) ***addhānavasenā**ti kāladdhānavasena* (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-318) 

According above commentary and sub-commentary, the length of in- and out-breath means duration of in- and out-breath, i.e., long breath means long duration while short breath means short duration respectively. 

It must be tried continuously in order to know long or short duration of both in- and out-breath accordingly. But it should not be tried to become long or short duration of each breath intentionally. It must be breathed normally and endeavoured not to wander out of the touching place of in- and out-breath. 

**PAGE 306** 

If  the  mind  of  meditation  fixes  on  the  object of  long  or  short  in-  and  out-breath continuously, signs of concentration (*nimitta*) will be appeared as mentioned in *Pat* *isambhidā Magga*. If the sign of concentration appeared at the touching place of in- and out-breath, the mind of meditation must be fixed together with that sign continuously. At that time it must be tried to know the whole in-breath and out-breath, i.e., from beginning to end of in- and out- breath, as the instruction in the Pāl i Text that *sabbakāya pat* *isamvedī*. 

If the sign of concentration is unstable or the mind of meditation is unstable to fix with sign of concentration, it must be tried to know the beginning, middle and end of both in- breath and out-breath normally. 

Although the mind of meditation is able to fix the object of long or short breath continuously, if the sign of neighbourhood  concentration has not been appeared yet, it must be tried continuously in order to know apparently the beginning, middle and end of both in- and out-breath. If it is possible to know like this, it is called the method of *anubandhanā*, explained in olden commentaries. 

25. *sabbakāya paţis* *am* *vedī* 

*sabbakāyapat* *isam* *vedī assasissāmīti sikkhati. sabbakāyapat* *isam* *vedī passasissāmīti sikkhati.* 

=It would be practised in order to occur the in-breath of which the beginning, middle and end must be known thoroughly. 

It would be practised in order to occur the out-breath of which the beginning, middle and end must be known thoroughly. 

Thus the in-breath must be occurred by insight associating with the knowledge which is able to know thoroughly it's beginning, middle and end. Similarly the out-breath must also be occurred. The Supreme Buddha and noble ones always praise the *bikkhu* who is practising to know thoroughly beginning, middle and end of both in- and out-breath. 

In this case it will be continued to present preachings of *Pat* *isam* *bhidā Magga* in order to clarify on *sabbakāya pat* *isam* *vedī*. 

**PAGE 307** 

26. The preaching of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga* 

*katham*   *sabbakāyapati* *samv* *etī  assasissāmīti  sikkhati*,  *sabbakāyapat* *isam* *vetī passasissāmīti sikkhati*, — 

*kāyoti dve kāyā nāmakāyo ca rūpakāyo ca*. *katamo nāmakāyo vedanā saññā cetanā phasso manasikāro*. *nāmañca nāmakāyo ca*, *ye ca vuccanti cittasańkhārā*, *ayam*  *nāmakāyo*. 

*katamo rūpakāyo*, *cattāro ca mahābhūtā catunnañca mahābhūtānam*  *upādāyarūpam*  *assāso  ca  passāso  ca  nimittañca  upanibandhanā  ye  ca  vuccanti  kāyasańkhārā*,  *ayam*  *rūpakāyo*. 

*katham*  *te kāyā pat* *ividitā honti*, *dīgham*  *assāsavasena cittassa ekaggatam*  *avikkhepam*  *pajānato sati upat* *t* *hitā hoti*, *tāya satiyā tena ñān* *ena te kāyā pat* *ividitā honti*. 

*dīgham*  *passāsavasena cittassa ekaggatam*  *avikkhepam*  *pajānato sati upat* *t* *hitā hoti*, *tāya satiyā tena ñān* *ena te kāyā pat* *ividitā honti*. ( *Pat* *isam*-181) 

(It is similar to *rassa* = short in-breath and out-breath also.)** 

How would it be practised in order to occur the in-breath of which the beginning, middle and end must be known thoroughly? How would it be practised in order to occur the out-breath of which the beginning, middle and end must be known thoroughly? 

With regarding to the term *kāya*, it means two kinds of *kāya*, i.e., *nāmakāya* and *r pakāya*. Which is *nāmakāya*? The contact, the feeling, the perception, the volition, the 

attention, which are called *cittasańkhāra*, or all mental *dhamma* called *nāma* are known as *nāmakāya*. 

Which is *r pakāya*? These *sańkhāradhamma*, the four great elements, twenty four kinds of derived corporealities which are occurring depending on the fore great elements, in-

breath and out-breath, sign of the touching place of in- and out-breath where the mindfulness fixed together (signs of preliminary, neighbourhood , full-concentration), which are called *kāyasan khāra* are determined as *r pakāya*. 

How those *kāya* are apparent? The person who knows the concentration and non- wandering of meditating mind, appears mindfulness by means of long duration of in-breath. Those *kāya* become apparent by means of that mindfulness and that knowledge. Those *kāya* are known thoroughly by that mindfulness and that knowledge. 

The person who  knows the concentration and non-wandering of meditating  mind, appears mindfulness by means of long duration of out-breath. Those *kāya* become apparent by means of that mindfulness and that knowledge. Those *kāya* are known thoroughly by that mindfulness and that knowledge. (It should be recognized similarly in short in-breath and 

out-breath.) 

Derived corporealities which occur depending upon the four great elements are shown in commentary of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga* as follows. 

**PAGE 308** 

*tam*  *pana cakkhu sotam*  *ghānam*  *jivhā kāyo rūpam*  *saddo gandho raso itthindriyam*  *purisindriyam*  *jīvitindriyam*  *hadayavatthu ojā kāyaviññatti vacīviññatti ākāsadhātu rūpassa- lahutā  rūpassa-mudutā  rūpassa-kammaññatā  upacayo  santati  jaratā  aniccatāti catuvīsatividhim* . (*Pat* *isam*-Com-2-112) 

Those  derived  corporealities  are  24  kinds,  i.e.,  eye-clear-sensitivity,  ear-clear- sensitivity,  nose-clear-sensitivity,  tongue-clear-sensitivity,  body-clear-sensitivity,  colour, sound,  smell,  taste,  controlling  faculty  of  femininity,  controlling  faculty  of  virility, controlling faculty of life, physical base of mind (heart base of mind), nutriment, bodily expression  corporeality,  verbal  expression  corporeality,  space-element,  physical  agility, physical  elasticity,  physical  adaptability,  *upacaya*,  continuity,  decaying  and  dissolution. (*Pat* *isam*-Com-2-112) (Explanations of those corporeal *dhamma* can be seen in Section 4, 

*r pakammat* *t* *hāna*.) 

The four great elements plus those 24 kinds of derived corporealities with the result 28 kinds of corporealities to which the ***meditator*** must try to know thoroughly according to the  phrase,  *sabbakāya  pat* *isam* *vedī*.  It  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  all  kinds  of consciousness and mental concomitants are known as *nāmakāya* to which the ***meditator*** must try  to  know  thoroughly  according  to  the  phrase,  all  kinds  of  mentalities  are  known  as *nāmakāya*. 

Those corporeal and mental *dhamma* are unable to occur uniquely, but are able to occur as a group called corporeal unit ( *r pa kalāpa* ), mental unit (*nāma kalāpa* ). It is their 

fixed  natural  law  of  corporeal  and  mental  *dhamma*  indeed.  Only  when  the  ***meditator***, therefore, is able to see and analyze each ultimate nature of corporeal and mental *dhamma* within respective unit systematically, can he know the ultimate corporeality and mentality by insight 

It should be recognized the fact that when the ***meditator*** performs *vipassanā* practice after  the  concentration  had  been  developed  through  mindfulness  of  breathing  he  must continue to know these corporeal and mental *dhamma* thoroughy. It should be recognized surely the fact that the way of practice by which all kinds mental and corporeal *dhamma* called *nāmakāya, r pakāya* are discerned by means of three general characters, is called 

*kayānupassanā satipat* *t* *hāna bhāvanā*, indeed. 

27. Grammatical analysis of the phrase “*sabbakāya pat* *isamvedī*”* 

*sabbakāyapat* *isam* *vedī  assasissāmi*.  *pa*.  *passasissāmīti  sikkhatīti  sakalassa assāsakāyassa  ādimajjhapariyosānam*   *viditam*   *karonto  pākat* *am*   *karonto  assasissāmīti sikkhati*. *sakalassa passāsakāyassa ādimajjhapariyosānam*  *viditam*  *karonto pākat* *am*  *karonto passasissāmīti ca*. *tasmā* “*assasissāmi passasissāmī*”*ti sikkhatīti vuccati*. (*Visuddi*-1-265) 

**PAGE 309** 

The phrase, *sabbakāya pats* *amvedī*, consists of five words, i.e., *sabba, kāya,  pat* *i*, *sam*  *and vedī*. The meaning of each word is as follows. 

1. The word, ***sabba***, means “all”. 
1. The word, ***kāya***, means “in-breath and out-breath”. 
1. Combination of two words, ***sabbakāya***, directs “ the beginning, middle and end of in- breath and out- breath”. 
1. The word, ***pat***  ***i*** ,  means ‘each’, ‘respective’, according to *Pāl* *i* dictionary, ‘*pat* *i pat* *i piccekam* ’. The prefix, *pat* *i,* is added and preached by the Buddha in order to instruct the way of practice by which all kinds of *assāsapassāsa kāya* consisting a group of sound nonads produced by mind of in-breath and out-breath must be known. 
1. The word, ***sam*** ,    means *sammā* (= thoroughly ). The Buddha preached by adding the word, *sam* , in order to instruct the way of practice called mindfulness of breathing must be carried out thoroughly. 
1. The word, ***vedī***, derived from ***vida*** which means ‘knowing’. Thus the word, *vedī*, has three kinds of meanings, i.e., *tassīla, atthiattha,* and *suddha kattu*.(*Mahāt* *ī*-1-321) Therefore  the  meanings  of  the  whole  sentence,  ‘*sabbakāyapat* *isamvedī....*(s) *passasissāmīti sikkhati.*’ are as follows. 

1.It would be practised with the intention that the in-breath will be inhaled by **usual knowing** 

thoroughly it's beginning, middle, and end respectively with the help of mind of meditation associated by knowledge. It would be practised with the intention that the out-breath will be exhaled by usual knowing thoroughly it’s beginning, middle and end respectively with the help of mind of meditation associated by knowledge.  

(*tassīla attha*) 

\2. It would be practised with the intention that the in-breath will be inhaled in the **presence of knowing** thoroughly it's beginning, middle, and end respectively with the help of mind of meditation associated by knowledge. It would be practised with the intention that the out- breath will be exhaled in the presence of knowing thoroughly it's beginning, middle and end respectively with the help of mind of meditation associated by knowledge. (*atthiattha* = ‘presence’ meaning) 

3.It would be practised with the intention that the in-breath will be inhaled by means of 

**capability of knowing** thoroughly it's beginning, middle, and end respectively with the help  of  mind  of  meditation  associated  by  knowledge.  It  would  be  practised  with  the intention that the out-breath will be exhaled by means capability of knowing thoroughly it's beginning, middle and end respectively with the help of mind of meditation associated by knowledge. 

(*suddhakattu* = ‘a pure subject’ meaning) 

These are meanings of above commentary. 

**PAGE 310** 

It is right — There are usually differences between each individual ***meditator*** who practises  the  mindfulness  of  breathing.  A  such  meditating  *bikkhu*  usually  has  apparent beginning of in-breath and out-breath but not middle and end due to consisting of numerous corporeal units in the whole breath. That *bhikkhu* is able to keep in mind the beginning only but tired to discern the middle and end of the whole breath. 

A such *bikkhu* usually has apparent middle of in- and out-breath but not the beginning and end with the result that that *bikkhu* is able to keep in mind the middle only but tired to discern the beginning and end of the whole breath. 

A such *bikkhu* usually has apparent end of in- and out-breath but not the beginning and middle with the result that that *bikkhu* is able to keep in mind the end only but tired to discern the beginning and middle. 

A such *bikkhu* usually has apparent the whole of both in- and out-breath resulting that *bikkhu* is able to keep in mind the beginning, middle and end of both in- and out-breath thoroughly without tiredness. 

The Buddha preached that ‘*sabbakāyapat* *isamvedī assasissāmīti...*(s) *passasissāmīti sikkhati*,’ in order to instruct the disciple who should be occurred the mind of meditation associated by mindfulness and knowledge which are leading to the object of the whole breath like this fourth *bikkhu,* indeed.(*Visuddhi*-1-265) 

28. **The reason of preaching that ‘*sikkhati*’ is added** 

Relating to way of preaching of the Buddha in above *Pāl* *i* quotation (in 3.2.25, page 306), that ‘*sikkhati* (= it would be practised or it must be practised),’ is explained in the commentary called *Visuddhi Magga*, as follows. 

The word , ‘***sikkhati***,’ means it would be tried hard (it must be **tried hard**) by means of capability of knowing thoroughly in order to know the whole breath, i.e., the beginning, middle and end of both in- and out-breath respectively with the help of mind of meditation associated by knowledge. 

**PAGE 311** 

In other words – in the continuum of practising ***meditator*** who id endeavouring to know thoroughly the whole in- and out-breath with the help of mind of meditation associated by knowledge, the mindfulness which protects the object of the whole breath (*satisam* *vara*) and  the  effort  which  protects  that  object  (*viriyasam* *vara*)  are  called  *adhisīla  sikkhā*  (the supreme training of virtue), while the concentration which put the mind in one-pointedness of the object of the breath, is called *adhisamādhi sikkhā* (the supreme training of concentration) and  the  knowledge  which  knows  thoroughly  the  whole  in-  and  out-breath  respectively, *adhipaññā sikkhā* (the supreme training of wisdom). 

It should be recognized the meaning of *sikkhati* as the fact that “it must be practised, carried  out,  developed,  done  frequently  on  these  three  trainings  by  taking  **the  object  of breaths** with the help of mindfulness”. (*Visuddhi*-1-266) 

29. **The reason of preaching with future tense as “*assasissāmi*, *passasissāmi*”** 

Among  four  tetrad  instructions  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  –  in  the  first  tetrad instructions  including  first  instruction  by  which  long  breath  must  be  known  and  second instruction  by  which  short  breath  must  be  known,  there  is  no  special  specification  but inhaling and exhaling merely must be known. The third instruction, however, includes special specifications that the effort plays vital important role in the occurrence of knowledge on the object of the whole breath, in gradual cessation of in- and out-breath called *kāyasan khāra*, in knowing on pleasurable interest (*pīti*) by knowledge. In previous two instructions, therefore, the preaching methodology in Pāl i is achieved by means of the present tense as “*assasāmīti pajānāti,  passasāmīti  pajānāti*”,  etc.  It  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  the  preaching methodology in *Pāl* *i* is achieved by means of the future tense, as ‘*assasissāmīti sikkhati*’... etc for the third instruction in order to instruct special specifications by which the knowledge must  be  occurred,  *kāyasan khāra*  must  be  ceased,  the  pleasurable  interest  (*pīti*)  must  be known apparently by mind of meditation associated with knowledge, etc. (*Visuddhi*-1-266) 

The occurrence of knowledge can be achieved by means of previous two methods, long and short methods, but if is not so difficult due to merely taking the object of long or short breaths as it's normal occurrence. 

**PAGE 312** 

Those previous two methods, therefore, had been done by yoking with the present tense. The third method, on the other hand, is very difficult to achieve like a man walks on the razor or on the path, which is full of razors. In the third method, therefore, there are many special specifications beforehand. In order to clarify strategy of the third method, it had been done by yoking with the future tense, The commentator explained above instructions in order to show clearly this meaning, indeed. (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-322) 

In the olden commentaries, a such method by which the beginning, middle and end of in-breath and out-breath must be known thoroughly is termed as *anubandhanānaya*. 

30. ***anubandhanānaya*** 

*anubandhanā nāma gan* *anam*  *pat* *isam* *harittvā satiyā nirantaram*  *assāsapassāsānam*  *anugamanam* . *tañca kho na ādhimajjapariyosānā nugamanavasena*. *bahi nikkhamanavātassa hi nābhi ādhi*, *hadayam*  *majjham* , *nāsikaggam*  *pariyosānam* . *abbhantaram*  *pavisanavātassa nāsikaggam*   *ādi,  hadayam*   *majjham*   *nābhi  pariyosānam* .  *tañcassa  anugacchato vikkhepagatam*  *cittam*  *sāraddhāya ceva* hoti iñjanāya *ca*. *yaghāha* — 

“*assāsādimajjhapariyosānam*   *satiyā  anugacchato  ajjhatam*   *vikkhepagatena  cittena kāyopi cittampi sāraddhā ca honti iñjitā ca phanditā* *ca*. *passāsādimajjhapariyosānam*  *satiyā anugacchato bahiddhā* *vikkhepagatena* *cittena* *kāyopi* *cittampi* *sāraddhā* *ca* *honti* *iñjitā* *ca* *phanditā* *cā*”*ti*.** (*Pat* *isam*-165, *Visuddhi*-1-272) 

The meaning of the above *Pāl* *i* Text and commentary is as follows. 

When  the  ***meditator***  has  fixed  mindfulness  on  the  object  of  breaths  by  counting method (***gananānaya***) etc, the latter should be taken into heart by ***anubandhanānaya***. When the mindfulness becomes strong, it must be tried to know the long or short in-breath and out- breath  as  mentioned  above.  In  this  stage,  the  sign  of  concentration  can  be  appeared sometimes.  Whether  the  sign  of  concentration  appears  or  not,  if  the  mindfulness  fixes together with the object of long or short in-breath and out-breath, it must be endeavoured to know thoroughly the whole in- and out-breath from the beginning to end respectively. That kind of endeavouring is called ***anubandhanānaya*** by which the object of in-breath and out- breath is taken into heart. 

**PAGE 313** 

The way of practice by which every in-breath and out-breath is followed continuously without interruption from the beginning to end by mindfulness is called *anubandhanānaya*. 

The process of taking into heart the in-breath and out-breath at its **touching** (***phutt***     ***h***   ***a***) place  is  called  continuously  follows  along  with  in-  and  out-breath  respectively.  In  other words, the continuous occurrence of mindfulness on every in-breath and out-breath by means of taking as object of the latter is called *anubandhanānaya* or ***anugamana*** ( = **continuous follows** to the in-breath and out-breath). (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-329, Translation of Pyi Sayadaw-2-242) 

Although the mindfulness follows along with the in-breath and out- breath, it must not follow such place where the in-breath and out-breath reaches as its beginning, middle and end. The exhaled air begins from umbilical region, the middle is the heart and it ends in the nostrils. 

The inhaled begins from the nostril, the middle is the heart and it ends in umbilical 

region. 

The meditating mind of that ***meditator*** who always follows the beginning, middle and end called those places, from nostril to umbilical region and vice versa, becomes either worry or wandering of taking into heart the object of breathing. It is preached in the *Pāl* *i* Text of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga* as follows. 

In  the  continuum  of  ***meditator***  who  follows  along  with  the  in-breath,  i.e.,  the beginning, middle and end called nostril, heart and umbilical region respectively by means of mindfulness, becomes worry both physically and mentally and it is shaken to take into heart the object of in-breath due to wandering of mind internally. In the continuum of ***meditator*** who follows along with the out-breath, i.e., the beginning, middle and end called umbilical region,  heart  and  nostril  respectively  by  means  of  mindfulness,  becomes  worry  both physically and mentally and it is shaken to take into heart the object of out-breath due to wandering of mind externally. (*Pats* *am*-165) 

Therefore, the ***meditator*** who practises the mindfulness of breathing by  means of *anubandhanā naya* must not follows along with the in- and out-breath , i.e., the beginning middle  and  end  called  nostril,  heart  umbilical  region  and  umbilical  region,  heart,  nostril respectively by means of mindfulness. Actually he must take to heart the mindfulness of breathing by means of *phusanā naya* or *t* *hapanā naya*. 

There  are  no  separate  ways  of  practice  of  mindfulness  of breathing  by  means  of *phusanā naya* and *t* *hapanā naya* as *gan* *anā naya* (counting method) and *anubandhanā naya* which have separate ways of practice in order to take into heart the mindfulness of breathing. In other words, there is neither pure *phusanā naya* nor *t* *hapanā naya* free from counting method and *anubandhanā naya* in the way of practice of mindfulness of breathing. 

**PAGE 314** 

As if it is so like that, there is a question that “aren’t counting method present free from *phusanānaya* in the way of practice of mindfulness of breathing like there is no way of practice of the mindfulness of breathing free from either *phusanā* or *t* *hapanā naya*?”. Yes, it is! However, as the counting method is designated as the most fundamental method of the mindfulness of breathing, *anubandhanā naya* is also designated as a specific way of practice by means of significant method (*padhāna naya*) due to occurrence of the most fundamental cause of *t* *hapanānaya* which is called the full absorption (*appanā jhāna*). This is because in the absence of that *anubandhanānaya* ( = discerning by following along with the breaths), the *t* *hapanā* called the ‘full absorption’ is unable to occur, indeed. 

The commentator Sayadaw explained that – ‘there are no separate ways of practice of mindfulness  of  breathing  by  means  of  mindfulness  *phusanā  naya*  and  *t* *hapanā  naya*  as *gan* *anā  naya*  (counting  method)  and  *anubandhanā  naya*  which  have  separate  ways  of practice in order to take into heart the mindfulness of breathing,’ in order to show the fact that *phusanā naya* and *t* *hapanā naya* are non-significant methods free from the counting method and *anubandhanā  naya*  which  are  the  fundamental  cause  and  significant  methods  in  the practice of mindfulness of breathing with which *phusanā naya* ( = the method that takes into heart the breath at the touching place ) always associates. (*Visuddhi* –1-272, *Mahāt* *ī*-1-329, 330) 

With regarding to the words, ‘there are no separate ways of practice of mindfulness of breathing by means of *phusanā naya* and *t* *hapanā naya*’, - the commentator Sayadaw Who want to instruct the fact that as the counting method which is carried out at the touching place of  the  breath  is  apparently  present,  pure  *t* *hapanā  naya*  and  pure  *phusanā  naya*  are  not apparently present from *anubandhanā naya*, explained the meaning that if a such period of practice during which the full absorption (*appanā jhāna* ) has not appeared  yet after the counting method had been omitted, that period of practice during which either *anubandhanā naya* ( = discerning by following along with the breaths ) or *phusanā naya* ( = discerning by taking the object of in- and out-breath at touching place ) must be carried out continuously and of the full absorption occurs apparently, it can be said that the mindfulness of breathing is achieved by means of either *anubandhanā naya* or *t* *hapanā naya*. 

**PAGE 315** 

There  is  a  question  that  —  ‘why  those  methods  called *phusanā*  and *t* *hapanā*  are separately designated in brief account of the way of practice of mindfulness of breathing although those methods are not present separately in the latter?’ The commentator answered as follows. 

1) ***gana***    ***nā – phusanā*** 

*phut* *t* *haphut* *t* *hat* *th* *āneyeva pana gan* *ento gan* *anāya ca phusanāya ca manasi karoti*. *tattheva gan* *anam*  *pat* *isam* *harittvā te satiyā anubandhanto appanāvasena ca cittam*  *t* *hapento anubandhanāya ca phusanāya ca t* *hapanāya ca manasi karotīti vuccati*.** ( *Visuddhi*-1-272) 

- Indeed, if the counting is carried out at the touching place of in-breath and out-

breath or the ***meditator*** who counts like this, it is called either ***gan*** ***a***   ***nā naya*** or ***phusanā naya*** by which the mindfulness of breathing is performed. 

2) ***anubandhanā – phusanā - t***  ***h***  ***apanā*** 

If either the mindfulness always follows along with those in-breath and out-breath continuously at the touching place after the counting method has been omitted or the mind of meditation is able to fix with the object of brilliant white sign of concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*) which usually appears as a consequence of full absorption, the way of practice by which the mindfulness of breathing is performed can be designated as any of ***anubandhanā naya*** or ***phusanā naya*** or ***th***    ***apanā naya***. (*Visuddhi*-1-272, *Mahāt* *ī* –1-330) 

According to above instructions – it should be recognized the most important fact that the way of practice must be performed by the mindfulness which always follows along with the whole in-breath and out-breath from the beginning to the end which is occurring at the touching place. 

However, when the mindfulness becomes strong at the touching place of in-breath and out-breath, it must be tried to put the mindfulness on the object of long or short in- and out-breath respectively. In this stage, the sign of concentration can be appeared sometimes. Whether the sign of concentration appears or not, if the mindfulness fixes together with the object  of  long  or  short  in-breath  and  out-breath,  it  must  be  endeavoured  by  means  of  *anubandhanā  naya*  in  order  to  know  thoroughly  the  whole  in-  and  out-breath  from  the beginning to end respectively. In order to clarify the way of practice commentaries explained with the help of similes as follows. 

31. ***pingulopamā*** **= the simile of dumb person** 

The dumb person sees both two edges and middle of wooden cradle, which regularly comes and goes from side to side during he is sitting at the base of supporting column of that cradle which is rocked by mother  

**PAGE 316** 

who is happy to see her son enjoying in the cradle. However, there is no anxiety in him in order to see both two edges and middle of the cradle. Similarly, the meditating *bikkhu* fixes the mindfulness at the hitching post called the nostril or upper lip (which is similar to the hitching –post of a calf that always desires to suck milk through nipples of the mother cow) and rocks the cradle called the in-breath and out-breath. He discerns both the whole in-breath and out-breath which is similar to rocked cradle by means of fixed mindfulness which is capable  of  fixed  mindfulness  which  is  capable  of  following  along  with  and  knowing thoroughly the beginning, middle and end of in- and out-breath at the hitching post called touching place, i.e., nostril or upper lip. However there is no anxiety in that *bikkhu* in order to see the beginning, middle and end of those in- and out-breath. This is the simile of dumb person. (*Visuddhi*-1-272) 

32. ***dovārik pamā* = the simile of gate keeper** 

The gate keeper never investigate either in the city or outside the city, such as ‘what is your name?, where did you come from?, what is inside your hand?’ etc. It is right. – It is not responsibility of that gatekeeper to check weapons and wealth carrying by those wanderers of inside or outside of the city. Actually, as every person who is just reaching at the entrance is checked, it is no responsibility to discern either inhaled breath (= from nostril to umbilical region) or exhaled breath which leaves out of nostril for that meditating *bikkhu* similarly. It should be recognized that it is his responsibility to discern the in-breath or out-breath only which  is  just  reaching  at  the  entrance  called  nostril  or  upper  lip.  This  is  the  simile  of gatekeeper. 

33. ***kakac pamā* = the simile of saw** 

*nimittam*  *asāsapassāsā*, *anāramman* *mekacitassa*. 

*ajānatoca tayo dhamme*, *bhāvanānupalabbhati*. 

*nimittam*  *asāsapassāsā*, *anāramman* *mekacitassa*. 

*jānatoca tayo dhamme*, *bhāvanā upalabbhatīti*. (*Visuddhi*-1-273) 

**PAGE 317** 

*nimittanti  upnibandhananimittam*   *nāsikaggam*   *mukhanimittamv* *ā. āramman* *amekacittassāti assāsapassāsānam*  *ekakkhan* *e appavattanato ekassa cittassa tayopi āramman* *am*  *na honti, nimittena saha assāso passāso vāti dveyeva ekakkhan* *e āramman* *am hontīti  attho.  ajānato  ca  tayo  chammeti  nimittam*   *assāso  passāsoti  ime  tayo  dhamme āramman* *akaran* *vasena avindantassa.* **(*Vimati*-1-216, 217)** 

- These three *dhamma*s, (1) *nimitta* called nostril or upper lip at which discerning 

mind of meditation is fixed (2) the in-breath (3) the out-breath, are not the objects of one consciousness simultaneously. Although it is not like that any ***meditator*** who does not know those  three  d*hamma*s  by  taking  as  object  is  unable  to  develop  the  concentration  of mindfulness of breathing. 

[**Notes:** Three kinds of *dhamma* called *nimitta* (touching place), the in-breath and out- breath are not the object of one consciousness simultaneously due to inability to occur both in-breath  and  out-breath  within  one  mind-moment  (*cittakkhan* *a*)  simultaneously.  Single consciousness  is  unable  to  know  three  kinds  of  *dhamma*s  simultaneously.  Either  *nimitta* together with the in-breath or *nimitta* together with the out-breath can be occurred the object of  single  consciousness.  It,  therefore,  means  that  those  three  kinds  of  *dhamma*  can  be occurred objects of different mind moments (*nānācittakhan* *a*) but not objects of single mind moment. It should be recognized the fact that these phrases are intended to be said referring the time before sign of full-concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*) has not attained yet. See page*  **346,347; section 3.2.56, 3.2.57*** ] 

These three *dhamma*s, (1) *nimitta* called nostril or upper lip at which discerning mind of  meditation  is  fixed,  (2)  the  in-  breath,  (3)  the  out-breath,  are  not  the  objects  of  one consciousness simultaneously. Although it is not like that any ***meditator*** who knows those three *dhamma*s by taking as object is able to develop the concentration of mindfulness of 

breathing. (*Pat* *isam*-169) 

Then  the  way  of practice  of  mindfulness  of breathing  is  continued  to  explain by means of question and answer in the Pāl i Text of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga* as follows. 

1) How aren’t these three *dhamma*s objects of single consciousness? 
1) How doesn’t the knowledge of ***meditator*** appear that these three *dhamma*s are not apparent? 
1) How doesn’t mind of meditation wander? 
1) How is the effort which carries out the practice of mindfulness of breathing apparent? 
1) How  does  the  absorption  (*jhāna*)  which  is  able  to  remove  hindrances  of  mind (*nīvaran* *a*) also achieve? 
1) How  does  the  Path-Knowledge  (*magga  ñān* *a*)  which  is  able  to  eradicate  fetters (*samy* *ojana*)  

**PAGE 318** 

For instance, a log is put on even surface of the ground. A man cuts that log by saw. The mindfulness appears in him by means of the saw touching on the log. He takes into heart neither teeth of saw coming forward him nor that of saw going far away. But he knows thoroughly both teeth of saw coming forward and going far away, indeed. The effort which is cutting the log is apparent. Diligence of cutting the log would be finished at all. 

1. It should be recognized *nimitta*, i.e., nostril or upper lip at which the in-breath and out-breath are touching and the mindfulness is fixed together, as a log which is put on even surface of the ground. 
2. It should be recognized the in-breath and out-breath as teeth of saw. ( It means the in-breath and out-breath are similar to teeth of saw.) 
2. (a) As the mindfulness of the man appears by means of teeth of saw touching on the log, 
2) as neither teeth of saw coming forward nor teeth of saw going far away is taken into heart, 
2) as neither teeth of saw coming forward nor teeth of saw going far away does not appear in the knowledge of that man,  
2) as the effort which cuts the log is apparent, 
2) as diligence of cutting the log would be finished, 

similarly, 

(a) the practising *bhikkhu* is sitting by means of mindfulness leading to either nostril or upper lip, 

(b)neither the in-breath nor the out-breath is taken into heart, 

(c)neither the in-breath nor the out-breath does not appear in the knowledge of that 

*bhikkhu*, both the breaths appear apparently, 

(d)the effort is apparent, 

(e)the full absorption (*jhāna*) would be finished, 

(f)the Path-Knowledge which is able to eradicate fetters is also attained, 

(g)the effort called *padhāna* would be occurred. 

Which is ‘***padhāna***’? Both physical and mental situations of such person with full of diligence are compatible with the practice of mindfulness of breathing in order to develop concentration. This situation is called ‘***padhāna***’. 

**PAGE 319** 

Which  is  ‘***payoga***’?  The  person  with  full  of  diligence  removes  hindrances  and defilements  which  are  blocking  the  full  absorption  and  Path-Knowledge  up,  and  initial application called *vitakka* would be ceased. This situation is called ‘***payoga***’. 

Which is ‘***visesa***’? For the person with full of diligence, fetters (*sam*   *yojana*) would be disappeared and underlying tendencies (***anusaya***) would be free from him. This situation is called ‘***visesa***’. 

Thus, these three kinds of *dhamma*s , i.e., *nimitta*, the in-breath, the out-breath, are not objects of one consciousness simultaneously. Although it is not objects of one consciousness, those three *dhamma*s appear in the knowledge of ***meditator***, indeed. 

Unless  those  three *dhamma*s  appear,  wandering  mind  will be  occurred;  the  effort which is able to finish the practice of mindfulness of breathing will not be appeared; the practising  person  is  unable  to  finish  *payoga*  which  is  able  to  remove  hindrances  and  to develop concentration. But it is not like that. Due to appearance of these three *dhamma*s, i.e., *nimitta*,  the  in-breath  and  the  out-breath  in  the  knowledge  of  ***meditator***,  the  mind concentrates well; the effort which is able to finish the practice of mindfulness of breathing would be appeared; the practising person is able to finish *payoga* which is able to remove hindrances  and  to  develop  concentration;  those  benefits  of  mundane  and  supra-mundane which are able to eradicate fetters would be attained successively. (*Pat* *isam* *-169-170)* 

*ānāpānassati yassa*, *paripun* *n* *ā subhāvitā*. 

*anupubbam*  *paricitā*, *yathā buddhena desitā*. 

*so imam*  *lokam*  *pabhāseti*, *abbhā muttova candimā*. (*Pat* *isam* -170) 

As  the  Buddha  preached  systematically,  it  should  be  performed  and  developed thoroughly the practice of mindfulness of breathing by means of (16) cascade of practice, such as, the long, the short, etc. The *bhikkhu* who fulfils those (16) cascade of practice, is able to adorn this world of *sańkhāra dhamma*, i.e., corporeal and mental *dhamma*, five-aggregates, by means of the light of wisdom as the moon escapes from various dirt, i.e., snows, fogs, smokes etc. (*Pat* *isam* -170) 

34. ***passambayam*****    **=**  **way of practice in order to cease the breath** 

It would be presented the fourth instruction of the first tetrad instructions, way of practice in order to cease the breath as follows. 

*passambhayam*  *kāyasańkhāram*  *assasissāmīti sikkhati.* 

*passambhayam*  *kāyasańkhāram*  *passasissāmīti sikkhati.* 

**PAGE 320** 

- It would be practised in order to occur cessation of *kāyasa* *khāra* called the in-breath. 
- It would be practised in order to occur cessation of *kāyasa* *khāra* called the out-breath. 

*kāyasańkhāranti  assaāsapassāsam.  so  hi  cittasamut* *th*  *ānopi  samāno karajakāyappat* *ibaddha-vuttitāya  tena  sańkharīyatīti  kāyasańkhāroti  vuccati.  yo  pana* “*kāyasańkhāro  vacīsańkhāro*”  *ti  evamāgato  kāyasańkhāro  cetanālakkhan* *o  satipi dvārantaruppattiyam*   *yebhuyyavuttiyā  tabbahulavuttiyā  ca  kāyadvārena  lakkhito*,  *so  idha nādhippeto.* (*Mahat* *ī*-1-322) 

***Kāyasańkhāra*** means the in-breath and out-breath. It is right. \_ Although those in- breath and out-breath are corporealities produced by mind, those are called *kāyasańkhāra* due to  occurrence  of  those  *dhamma*  related  with  underived  and  derived  corporealities  called *karajakāya*. 

In this case it does not mean *kāyasańkhāra* that is preached in some Pāl i Text as ‘ *kāyasańkhāro vacīsańkhāro*’,etc. It must be interpreted mind and mental concomitants among which the volition (*cetanā*) is significant for *kāyasańkhāra* due to frequent occurrence of those  *dhamma*  in  body-door  (*kāyadvāra*)  although  those  *dhamma*s  can  be  occurred infrequently  in  verbal-door  (*vacīdvāra*)  and  mind-door  (*manodvāra*).  That  kind  of *cetanākāyasańkhāra* is not meant in this case. (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-322) 

Successive  cessation  of  the  in-breath  and  out-breath  had  been  explained  in  the commentary called *Visuddhi Magga* as follows. 

The meaning of – ‛it would be practised in order to occur cessation of *kāyasańkhāra* called the in breath which is slightly gross’, and ‛it would be practised in order to occur cessation of *kāyasańkhāra* called the out-breath which is slightly gross,’ is the fact that ‛it would  be  practised  with  the  intention  that  slight  gross  in-breath  and  out-breath  called *kāyasańkhāra* must be ceased again and again.’ 

35. ***ol***  ***ā***  ***rika-sukhuma-passaddhi*** 

In those words— the occurrence of gross ( *ol* *ārika* ), subtle ( *sukhuma* ), tranquillity ( *passadhi* ) in-breath and out-breath should be known as follows. 

In the continuum of this practicing *bhikkhu* both all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya* and mind are stressful and gross before mindfulness of breathing has not been practiced yet. 

**PAGE 321** 

Unless both physical and mental situations are subtle and tranquil especially, the in- breath and out-breath become strong and gross resulting the nostril is full of breaths and it is adjusted by inhaling and exhaling through buccal cavity. 

On the other hand — For a such time, both all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karaja-kāya* and mental *dhamma* are kept in mind thoroughly ( = distinguished by knowledge )  in  the  continuum  of  that  practicing  *bhikkhu*.  At  that  time,  both  physical  and  mental situations become tranquil. The more tranquil the physical and mental situations, the less apparent in-breath and out-breath. Finally it would be occurred as it is seem to be investigated that whether in-breath and out-breath are present or not. ( *Visuddhi*-1-266 ) 

[The meaning of above quotation of commentary is as follows: — 

Before the practice of mindfulness of breathing has not been performed it can be said that the ***meditator*** has not finished to keep in mind corporeal and mental *dhamma*. 

With regarding to the words, ‘*nisīdati pallańkam*  *ābhujittvā ujum*  *kāyam*  *pan* *idhāy*’ ( 

- ‘it is sitting cross-legged by upright position of the upper part of the body’ ), the Buddha preached that how to keep in mind corporeal *dhamma* of the ***meditator***. 

With  regarding  to  the  words,  ‘*parimukham*   *satim*   *upat* *t* *hapettvā*’  (  =  ‘after  the mindfulness would be leading to the object of practice of mindfulness of breathing’ ), the Buddha preached that how to keep in mind mental *dhamma*. 

When the practising ***meditator*** is sitting cross-legged by upright position of the upper part of body and he is developing the concentration by means of the mindfulness leading to the  object  of  practice  of  mindfulness  of  breathing,  both  physical  and  mental  situations become tranquil gradually. 

In the word, ‘**become tranquil**’, it means that previously, due to lack of wandering mind to various external objects and due to presence of unique object called in-breath or out- breath,  the  mind  of  ***meditator***  becomes  tranquil  and  quiescent.  Due  to  tranquillity  and quiescence of mind of meditation, numerous corporeal *dhamma* produced by that mind of meditation become agile, elastic and it is adaptable to perform the practice of mindfulness of breathing. Due to compatibility of remaining corporealities, i.e., corporealities produced by *kamma*,  corporealities  produced  by  temperature,  corporealities  produced  by  nutriment  to corporealities produced by mind of meditation, the former becomes agile, elastic and it is adaptable to perform the practice of mindfulness of breathing. Thus when both mind and all kinds  of  corporeal  *dhamma*  produced  by  four  causes,  which  are  commonly  known  as *rūpakāya*,  become  tranquil  and  quiescent,  the  in-breath  and  out-breath  which  occur depending upon those mind and *karajakāya* ( = *rūpakāya* excluding in-breath and out-breath ), become subtle and subtle. ( *Mahāt* *ī*-1-323 )] 

**PAGE 322** 

As a simile — a such man who is standing just after marathon is finished or a such man who is standing just after heavy burden is put down above from the head or a such man who is standing just after go down from high mountain, is full of very strong and gross breaths in the nostril with the result that it is adjusted by inhaling and exhaling through buccal cavity. 

As a next simile — For a such time, after that exhaustion had been removed by either taking bath or drinking water, this man is lying down under the cold shade of a tree and he is taking rest by putting a wet towel on his chest. At that time those in-breaths and out-breaths of that man become subtle and subtle.  Finally, it would be occurred as it is seem to be investigated that whether both in-breath and out-breath are present or not. 

In the same way — before the mindfulness of breathing has not been practiced yet, both physical and mental situations are stressful and gross. Unless both physical and mental situations are subtle and tranquil especially, the in-breath and out-breath become strong and gross resulting the nostril is full of breaths and it is adjusted by inhaling and exhaling through buccal cavity. 

In the next way — for a such time, both all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* and mental *dhamma* are kept in mind thoroughly, ( = distinguished by knowledge ) in the continuum of that practicing *bhikkhu*. At that time, both physical and mental situations become tranquil. The more tranquil physical and mental situations, the less apparent in-breath and out-breath. Finally, it would be occurred as it is seem to be investigated that whether in-breath and out- breath are present or not. (*Visuddhi Magga* -1-266-267 ) 

36. **The reasoning** 

It would be the causes of the following reasons — 

Before  the  practice  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  has  been  taken  place,  these  four factors, 

1) Previous premeditation, ***ābhoga***, by which the gross *kāyasańkhāra* must be subtle, 
1) ability to take heed well in order to cease the in-breath and out-breath = ***samannāhāra*** 

**PAGE 323** 

3) the  attention by  which  the  cessation  of  in-breath  and  out-breath  must be  occurred  = ***manasikāra***, 
3) the reflection by which the cessation of in-breath and out-breath must be occurred = ***paccavekkhan***  ***ā***  , 

would not be occurred apparently. However, during practice of the mindfulness of breathing  has  being  taken  place  those  four  factors  would  be  occurred  apparently  in  the continuum of ***meditator***. The in-breath and out-breath called *kāyasańkhāra*, therefore, would be more and more quiescent in later stages of practice successively. ( *Visuddhi Magga* –1-267 ) 

When  both  in-breath  and  out-breath  become  subtle  it  must  be  balanced  between inhaling and exhaling. If inhaling is stronger than exhaling, upper part of body usually turns backward. If exhaling is stronger than inhaling, upper part of body usually bends forward. Be careful! 

37. ***ol*** ***ā***   ***rika-sukhuma* (gross-subtle)** 

Then in the commentary called *Visuddhi Magga*, various degrees of gross and subtle situations in successive stages of *samatha* and *vipassanā* as follows. 

**(3.2.37.a) Assumptions of *dīghabhān***  ***a***  ***ka-samy***    ***uttabhān***  ***a***  ***ka*** 

1. By the time, long and short, the whole breath from beginning to end, is discerned and kept  in  mind  thoroughly,  it  is  still  gross.  By  the  moment,  the  neighbourhood concentration of the first absorption is achieved, it is subtle. 
1. By the moment, the neighbourhood  concentration of the first absorption is achieved, it is also gross. By the moment, the first absorption occurs, it is subtler than it’s neighbourhood  
3. By the moments, both the first absorption and neighbourhood  concentration of the second absorption occur, there are still gross. By the moment, the second absorption occurs, it is subtler than previous moments. 
3. By the moments, both the second absorption and neighbourhood  concentration of the third  absorption  occur,  there  are  still  gross.  By  the  moment,  the  third  absorption occurs, it is subtler than previous moments. 
3. By  the  moments,  both  third  absorption  and  neighbourhood   concentration  of  the fourth absorption occur, there are still gross. By the moment, the fourth absorption occurs, it is so subtle that the breaths would be ceased totally. 

*catutthajjhāne atisukhumo appavattimeva pāpun* *ātīti* **( *Visuddhi Magga*-1-267 )** 

These  are  assumptions  of  *dhīghabhān* *aka  thera*s  (  =  those  noble  *bhikkhus*  who memorized the Long Discourses ) and *samy* *uttabhān* *aka thera*s ( = those noble *bhikkhus* who memorized the Connected Discourses ). 

**PAGE 324** 

**(3.2.37.b) Assumptions of *majjhimabhān***  ***a***  ***ka*** 

*Majjhimabhān* *aka  thera*s  (  =  those  noble  *bhikkhus*  who  memorized  the  Middle Discourses  ), however, preferred the  assumption that by the moment,  the neighbourhood  concentration of the upper absorption occurs, it is subtler than the moment at which the lower absorption occurs, such as, ‛ at the moment of the first absorption, it is gross in-breath and out-breath, but the moment of the neighbourhood  concentration of the second absorption is subtler than the former,’ etc … 

**(3.2.37.c) The assumptions agreed with all noble Theras** 

However,  according  to  the  assumptions  agreed  with  all  noble  Theras,  i.e., *dhīghabhān* *aka,  samy* *uttabhānk* *a,  majjhimabhān* *aka*,  ‘those  *kāyasańkhāra*  called  the  in- breath and out-breath which occurred before it is kept in mind by knowledge cease after it is kept in mind by knowledge. Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred after it is kept in mind by knowledge cease at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the first absorption. 

Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the first absorption cease at the moment of the first absorption. 

Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred at the moment of the first absorption cease at the moment of the neighbourhood  concentration of the second absorption. 

Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the second absorption cease at the moment of the second absorption. 

Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred at the moment of the second absorption cease at the moment of the neighbourhood  concentration of the third absorption. 

Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the third absorption cease at the moment of the third absorption. 

Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred at the moment of the third absorption cease at the moment of the neighbourhood  concentration of the fourth absorption. 

Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the fourth absorption cease at the moment of the fourth absorption respectively. These are successive  cessation  of  *kāyasańkhāra*  called  in-breath  and  out-breath  in  *samatha*  stage previously. (*Visuddhi Magga*-1-267) 

**(3.2.37.d) Successive cessation in *vipassanā* stage**  

Then it is continued to explain in *Visuddhi Magga* how the in-breath and out-breath become successively. This explanation shows how to change from *samatha* to *vipassanā* by means of the practice of mindfulness of breathing. 

**PAGE 325** 

1. By the time, those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occur before the four great elements are distinguished and kept in mind by knowledge, it is gross for the practicing ***meditator*** who prefers to discern corporeal *dhamma* consisting in the breaths beforehand. Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which are occurring during the four great elements are distinguished and kept in mind by knowledge are subtle. 

[***catudhātumukhena** vipassanābhinivesam*  *sandhāya vuttam* . (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-324) 

The commentator explained that ‘those *kāyasańkhāra*s which are occurring during the four great elements are distinguished and kept in mind by knowledge are subtle’ with the intention that *san* *khāra dhamma*s which are the object of *vipassanā* practice are taken in heart by means of discerning on the four great elements beforehand. (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-324)] 

2. Those *kāyasańkhāra*s which occurred during the four great elements are kept in mind are also still gross, while those occurring during derived corporealities are kept in mind are subtle. 
2. Those *kāyasańkhāra*s are also still gross, while those occurring during all kinds of corporeal  *dhamma*  are  kept  in  mind  commonly,  are  subtler  than  the  former. [***bhāvanāya uparūpari pan***  ***ī*** ***t*** ***abhāvato*** = it is due to supremacy of successive levels of practice. (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-324)] 
2. Those  *kāyasańkhāra*s  are  also  still  gross,  while  those  occurring  during  mental *dhamma* is kept in mind are subtler than the former.  
2. Those *kāyasańkhāra*s are also still gross, while those occurring during both corporeal and mental *dhamma*s are kept in mind, are subtler than the former. 
2. Those  *kāyasańkhāra*s  are  also  still  gross,  while  those  occurring  during  causal *dhamma*s of corporeality and mentality are kept in mind, are subtler than the former. 
2. Those *kāyasańkhāra*s are also still gross, while those occurring during both corporeal and mental *dhamma*s together with their causes are distinguished and kept in mind, are subtler than the former. 
2. Those  *kāyasańkhāra*s  are  also  still  gross,  while  those  occurring  during  *vipassanā* knowledge has been developed by means of discerning on three general characters, i.e., *anicca* (impermanence), *dukkha* (suffering), *anatta* (non-self) of corporealities and mentalities together with their causes alternatively, are subtler than the former. (It refers  to  the  stage  called  *kalāpasammasana*  *ñān* *a*  during  which  five-aggregates occurring as 11 situations, i.e., past, future, present, internal, external, gross, subtle, inferior,  superior,  far,  near,  are  generalized  commonly  by  means  of  three  general characters alternatively.) 
2. Those *kāyasańkhāra*s  are also still gross, while those occurring during **immature *vipassanā* practice** (***dubbala vipassanā***), i.e., *udayabbaya ñān* *a* (the knowledge of arising and perishing away), *bhańga ñān* *a* (the knowledge of dissolution), *baya ñān* *a* (the knowledge of fears), *ādīnava ñān* *a* (the knowledge of faults), are subtler than the 

former. 

**PAGE 326** 

10. Those  *kāyasańkhāra*s  are  also  still  gross,  while  those  occurring  during  **matured *vipassanā*  practice**  (***balava  vipassanā***),  i.e.,  upper  *vipassanā*  knowledges, *nibbidānupassanā ñān* *a* (the knowledge of boredom), etc, are subtler than the former. It should be recognized that those *kāyasańkhāra*s occurring in succeeding *vipassanā* 

stages are subtler than those occurring in preceding ones successively, similar to mentioned in *samatha* stages. 

Thus it should be recognized on the occurrence of gross (*ol* *ārika*), subtle (*sukhuma*), tranquil situations of *kāyasańkhāra* in *samatha* and *vipassanā* stages respectively. (*Visuddhi Magga*-1-266, 268; *Mahāt* *ī*-1-323, 324) 

38. **Explanation found in *Pat***  ***i*** ***s*** ***ambhidā Magga*** 

In the Pāl i Text of *Pat* *isambhidā Magga*, occurrence of tranquil *kāyasańkhāra* had been explained by questions and answers as follows. (*Pats* *am*-183) 

How would it be practiced that the in-breath  would be inhaled so as a means of cessation of gross *kāyasańkhāra*? How would it be practiced that the out-breath would be inhaled so as a means of cessation of gross *kāyasańkhāra*? 

Which are *kāyasańkhāra*s? 

1. Long in-breaths occur depending upon the body. 

[*kāyikāti rūpakāye bhavā*. (*Pat* *isam*-Com-2-113, *Mahāt* *ī*-1-324) 

- It  means  that  those  in-breaths  (out-breaths)  occur  depending  upon  all  kinds  of 

corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*, i.e., un-derived and derived corporealities.] 

Due to occurrence of those *dhamma*s (in-breaths) relating with the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*) and due to preparation of those *karajakāya*, those are  called  *kāyasańkhāra*.  It  would  be  practiced  so  as  a  means  of  cessation  of  gross *kāyasańkhāra*s successively. 

2. Long out-breaths occur depending upon the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*). Due to occurrence of those *dhamma*s (out-breaths) relating with the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*) and due to preparation of those *karajakāya*, those are called *kāyasańkhāra*. It would be practiced so as a means of cessation of gross *kāyasańkhāra*s successively. 
2. Short in-breaths occur depending upon the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*). Due to occurrence of those *dhamma*s (in-breaths) relating with the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*) and due to preparation of those *karajakāya*, those are called *kāyasańkhāra*. It would be practiced so as a means of cessation of gross *kāyasańkhāra*s successively. 
2. Short out-breaths occur depending upon the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*). Due to occurrence of those *dhamma*s (out-breaths) relating with the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*) and due to preparation of those *karajakāya*, those are called *kāyasańkhāra*. It would be practiced so as a means of cessation of gross *kāyasańkhāra*s successively. 
2. Those in-breaths of which beginning, middle and end would be known thoroughly, occur depending upon the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*). Due to occurrence of those *dhamma*s (in-breaths) relating with the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*) and due to preparation of those *karajakāya*, those are called *kāyasańkhāra*. It would be practiced so as a means of cessation of gross *kāyasańkhāra*s successively. 
6. Those out-breaths of which beginning, middle and end would be known thoroughly, occur depending upon the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*). 

**PAGE 327** 

Due to occurrence of those *dhamma*s (out-breaths of which beginning, middle and end would be known thoroughly) relating with the body (= all kinds of corporeal *dhamma* called *karajakāya*) and due to preparation of those *karajakāya*, those are called  *kāyasańkhāra*.  It  would  be  practiced  so  as  a  means  of  cessation  of  gross *kāyasańkhāra*s successively. 

The body (*rūpakāya*) which has such natures of gross *kāyasańkhāra*s as follows— 

1. *ānamanā* = such bending forward from backward, 
1. *vinamanā* = such bending side to side, 
1. *sannamanā* = such bending toward around all directions extremely, 
1. *pan* *amanā* = such bending backward from forward, 
1. *iñjanā* = such shivering forward, 
1. *phandanā* = such shivering side to side, 
1. *calanā* = such shivering toward around all directions 
1. *pakampanā* = such shivering backward, 

is present. It would be tried and practiced with the intention to inhale so as a means of cessation of *kāyasańkhāra*s which have those gross natures. It would be tried and practised with the intention to exhale so as a means of cessation of *kāyasańkhāra*s which have those gross natures. 

The body (*rūpakāya*) which has such natures of *kāyasańkhāra*s as follows — 

1. such unbending forward from backward, 
1. such unbending side to side, 
1. such unbending toward around all directions, 
1. such unbending backward from forward, 
1. such non-shivering forward, 
1. such non-shivering side to side, 
1. such non-shivering toward around all directions, 
1. such non-shivering backward, 

is present. It would be tried and practiced with the intention to inhale so as a means of cessation of *kāyasańkhāra*s which have those quiescent and subtle natures. It would be tried and practised with the intention to exhale so as a means of cessation of *kāyasańkhāra*s which have those quiescent and subtle natures. 

If it is tried and practiced with the intention to inhale and exhale by means of various ways mentioned above, these complaints will be occurred as follows. 

**PAGE 328** 

1. It is **unable to occur** and develop mind of meditation which knows the in-breath and out-breath by taking as fixed objects. 
1. It is **unable to occur** and develop subtle in-breath and out-breath due to cessation of subtle in-breath and out-breath as a result of efficiency of the practice. 
1. It is **unable to occur** and develop the mindfulness of breathing which is associating with the mind of those in-breath and out-breath due to absence of those objects. 
4. It is **unable to occur** and develop the concentration of the mindfulness of breathing, which  is  associating  with  the  mindfulness  of  breathing  due  to  non-occurrence  of mindfulness of breathing which has the objects called in-breath and out-breath like that. 
4. It is **unable to enter** that kind of absorption which has the objects called in-breath and out-breath for wise and noble ones. 
4. It is **unable to emerge** from the absorption which has the objects of those in-breath and out-breath due to inability to enter like that. 

If it is tried and practiced with the intention to inhale and exhale so as a means of cessation of *kāyasańkhāra*s which have those quiescent and subtle natures mentioned above. If those gross and gross *kāyasańkhāra*s will be tranquil and subtle, 

1. it is **able to occur** and develop mind of meditation which knows the in-breath and out-breath by taking as fixed objects. 
1. it is **able to occur** and develop in-breath and out-breath although subtle in-breath and out-breath had been ceased as a result of efficiency of the practice. 
1. it is **able to occur** and develop the mindfulness of breathing which is associating with the mind of those in-breath and out-breath. 
1. it is **able to occur** and develop the concentration of the mindfulness of breathing, which is associating with the mindfulness of breathing, which is associating with the mindfulness of breathing , that has the objects called in-breath and out-breath. 
1. Due to above reasons it is **able to enter** that kind of absorption which has the objects called in-breath and out-breath for wise and noble ones. 
1. Due to capable of entering into the absorption like that it is **able to emerge** from the absorption which has the objects of those in-breath and out-breath. 

**PAGE 329** 

It would be recognized how the way of practice by which very subtle and subtle *kāyasańkhāra*s are developed by ceasing gross and gross *kāyasańkhāra*s successively can be achieved as follows— 

A simile to be paralleled — 

When a bronze gong is hit with a hammer, gross and loud sounds appear previously. Although gross and loud sounds disappear, then subtle and fine sounds appear due to taking into heart the object of sign of gross and loud sounds well and it has been memorized in mind well. 

As the mind which has the object of sign of subtle and fine sounds would be occurred, although  subtle  and  find  sounds  disappear  successively,  due  to  taking  into  heart  and memorized well the object of sign of subtle and fine sounds in the mind, — 

Similarly,  gross  and  rough  in-breaths  and  out-breaths  occur  previously.  Although gross and rough in-breaths and out-breaths cease, then subtle and calm in-breaths and out- breaths occur due to taking into heart the object of sign of gross and rough in-breaths and out- breaths well and it has been memorized in mind well. 

The mind of meditation which has the objects of subtle and calm in-breaths and out- breaths would be occurred and it does not wander although subtle and calm in-breaths and out-breaths cease successively due to taking into heart and memorized will the object of sign of subtle and calm in-breath and out-breaths in the mind. 

When it is occurred in this way, — 

1. It **would be occurred** and developed mind of meditation which knows the in-breath and out-breath by taking as fixed objects. 
2. It **would be occurred** and developed in-breath and out-breath although subtle in- breath and out-breath had been ceased as a result of efficiency of the practice. 
2. It  **would  be  occurred**  and  developed  the  mindfulness  of  breathing  which  is associating with the mind of those in-breath and out-breath. 
2. It  **would  be  occurred**  and  developed  the  concentration  of  the  mindfulness  of breathing,  which  is  associating  with  the  mindfulness  of  breathing,  which  is associating with the mindfulness of breathing , that has the objects called in-breath and out-breath. 
2. Due to above reasons, it **would be entered** that kind of absorption which has the objects called in-breath and out-breath for wise and noble ones. 
2. Due to capable of entering into the absorption like that it **would be emerged** from the absorption which has the objects of those in-breath and out-breath. 

**PAGE 330** 

In  the  words,  *passambayam*   *kāyasańkhāram*   =  by  ceasing  of  *kāyasańkhāra*,  etc, preached on the Pāl i Text, — 

The in-breath and out-breath (= *assāsapassāsakāya, rūpakaya, nāmakāya*) are called *kāya*. The mindfulness, due to capable of adhering to the object called those in-breath and out-breath (*rūpakāya, nāmakāya*), is called *upat* *t* *hāna*. The wisdom (*paññā*) which is able to discern repeatedly on those *kāya* is called the knowledge (*ñān* *a*). 

*Kāya*, due to occurrence of adhered site of mindfulness, is called *upat* *t* *hāna* but not *sati*. The mindfulness, on the other hand, is called not only *upat* *t* *hāna*, due to capable of adhering to objects (which are three kinds of *kāya*), but also *sati*, due to capable of remembering the object.  Those  three  kinds  of  *kāya*  is  discerned  repeatedly  by  that  mindfulness  and  that knowledge. It, therefore, is designated as *kāya kāyānupassanā satipat* *t* *hāna bhāvanā*( = the practice of mindfulness by shich the body is repeatedly discerned). (*Pat* *isam*-183-184) 

39. **Further explanations** 

*bhāvanāvisuddhiyā  kāyasańkhāre  passambhamānepi  ol* *ārikam*   *kāyasańkharam*  *passambhemīti  yogino  ābhoge  sati  tenādarena  ativiya  passambhati*.  *anupat* *t* *hahantampi sukhumam*  *suānayam*  *hoti*.**  (*Pat* *isam*-Com-2-115)** 

According to the teaching of the Buddha, if the practice of mindfulness of breathing is performed, 

1. in order to know the ‘long’, 
1. in order to know the ‘short’, 
1. in order to know the ‘the whole breath’, i.e., beginning, middle, end, 
1. in order to cease the breaths, successively, *kāyasańkhāra* become very calm due to regarding  to  cease  gross  and  rough  *kāyasańkhāra*  and  due  to  purity  of  practice. Although gross *kāyasańkhāra* is not appeared in the knowledge, very subtle and fine *kāyasańkhāra* can be carried out well. (*Pat* *isam*-Com-2-115) 
40. **The occurrence of practice** 

*pabhāvanā  hotīti  yadipi  ol* *ārikā  kāyasańkhārā  patippassam* *bhanti*,  *sukhumā  pana atthevāti  anukkamena  paramasukhuma  bhāva  pattassa  vasena  nimittuppattiyā ānāpānassatiyā  ānāpānassatisamādhissa  ca  pabhāvanā  ijjhatevāti  adhippāyo*.  **(*Mahāt***  ***ī*** **-** **1- 326)** 

*assāsapassāse nissāya uppannanimittampettha assāsapassāsasamaññameva vuttam* . **(*Mahātī***   **-** **1-319)** 

When the in-breath and out-breath cease totally, how the practice of mindfulness of breathing can be occurred is that — Those *kāyasańkhāra*s called gross, rough in-breath and out-breath cease,  

**PAGE 331** 

however,  very  subtle,  fine  *kāyasańkhāra*s  are  still  present.  Therefore,  the  practice  of mindfulness of breathing which develops the concentration associated with mindfulness is accomplished by taking the object of sign of full concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*) which is brilliant like a star after the mind of meditation omit to take the object of very subtle and fine in-breath and out-breath which is able to change sign of full-concentration.(*Mahāt* *ī*-1-326) 

According to the explanation of sub-commentary, — it should be recognized that the practice of the mindfulness of breathing is present continuously although the object of in- breath and out-breath become very subtle and finally ceased. This is because by the time the breaths  are  very  fine  and  calm,  the  sign  of  (neighbourhood  )  full-concentration  usually appears. At that time, the mind of meditation leads to the object of sign of concentration but not on that of breaths. If the concentration would be developed by taking the object of sign of full  concentration  continuously,  the  first  absorption,  the  second  absorption,  the  third absorption, and the fourth absorption can be occurred successively resulting in total cessation of breaths in the last absorption one. It should be recognized that the practice of mindfulness of breathing is accomplished due to presence of sign of full-absorption on which the mind of meditation takes as object continuously. Therefore, the commentary of  *Pat* *isambhidā Magga* explained that although usual object of the in-breath and out-breaths are unapparent in the knowledge of  ***meditator***, very subtle and fine breaths is possible to be performed well and continuously the practice of mindfulness of breathing because the sign of full-concentration which  occurs  depending  upon  usual  object  of  in-breath  and  out-breath,  can  be  called *assāsapassāsa*. (*Pat* *isambhidā Magga*-Com-2-115) 

41. **It must be followed respectfully on the instructions** 

If  the  ***meditator***  wants  to  change  *vipassanā*  through  the  concentration  of  fourth absorption of the mindfulness of breathing as a fundamental object of *vipassanā*, he must develop  concentration  of  the  fourth  absorption  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  beforehand. During developing concentration it should be followed respectfully on above instructions found in the Pāl i Text, commentary and sub-commentary. According to these instructions, it must be firmly recognized the fact that the ***meditator*** must be able to practise in order to occur subtle in-breath and out-breath but not gross ones especially. 

**PAGE 332** 

42. **Cascade of practices** 

In the continuum of *bhikkhu* who practices the practice of mindfulness of breathing as the Buddha’s teaching in order to — 

1. know long in-breath and out-breath , 
1. know short in-breath and out-breath , 
1. know the whole breath from the beginning to end ( = in order to fix the mindfulness on the whole breaths), 
1. become  subtle  and  subtle  condition  of  breaths  successively,  the  sign  of (neighbourhood ) full-concentration usually appears within not so long lasting time. The concentration called *appanā jhāna* (full-absorption which is adorned by factors of absorption,  i.e.,  initial  application  (*vitakka*),  sustained  application  (*vicāra*), pleasurable  interest  (*pīti*),  mentally  agreeable  (*sukha*),  one-pointedness  of  mind (*ekaggatā*) is also accomplished in him. 

In some ***meditators*** after the in-breath and out-breath are taken into heart by means of counting method previously and when gross in-breath and out-breath become subtler and subtler it is resulting in tranquillity of both physical and mental *dhamma* successively. It usually becomes agility of the whole body that seems to be raised in the sky. 

As a simile — when such person who is very tired bodily sits on either bed or chair the lower parts of bed, chair etc. usually flex downward. Then it usually crackles noisily at the adjacent parts of those bed, chair etc. The bed cover which is come on contact with body, hip, elbow, etc., usually shrinks as a result. 

When such person who is not tired sits on either bed or chair etc., the lower parts of bed, chair never flex downward, no noise is produced and the bed-cover which is come in contact with body, hip, elbow, etc., never shrink resulting in the appearance of those bed, chair seem to be filled with cotton. This is because the fresh body is agile and seems to be filled with cotton. 

Similarly, after the in-breath and out-breath are taken into heart by means of counting method previously and when gross in-breath and out-breath become subtler and subtler it is resulting in tranquillity of both physical and mental *dhamma* successively. It usually becomes agility of the whole body that seems to be raised in the sky. (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-247) 

**PAGE 333** 

43. **One noticeable fact** 

Some ***meditators*** who reach to this stage become wandering due to agility of the whole body that seem to be raised in the sky. That wandering mind is a kind of restlessness (*uddhacca*) which back out of the object of meditation resulting in a danger of concentration. The possessed concentration usually becomes fall dawn. In some ***meditators***, it is full of pleasurable interest (*pīti*) like rocking in cradle. At that time, a factor of enlightenment, the pleasurable  interest  called  *pītisambojjhańga*  is  predominant  and  it  must  be  developed opposite factors of enlightenment, i.e., tranquillity, concentration and neutrality. It must be tried to occur stability of mind of meditation on the object of in-breath and out-breath only. In order to develop opposite factors of enlightenment, 

1. it  must  be  emphasized  on  the  object  of  in-breath  and  out-breath  calmly,  then tranquillity of factor of enlightenment becomes strong. 
1. it must be fixed the mind of meditation with the object of in-breath and out-breath as a slab is put under water, then concentration of factor of enlightenment becomes strong. 
3. At that time, due to decrease in the degree of pleasurable interest, it is lack of extreme effort to fix the object of in-breath and out-breath, with the result that neutrality of factor of enlightenment called *tatramajjhattupekkhā* become strong. 

In this stage it must be very careful not to be afraid of situation of the body that seems to be raised in the sky. The frightened mind is a kind of anger called feedback of anger, which is a disturbance of concentration. It is essential to be careful not to detach from usual object of in-breath and out-breath continuously. 

44. **A simile of bronze gong hit with a hammer** 

When the mind of ***meditator*** becomes strongly fixed on the object of breaths, the ***meditator*** must perform 

1. in order to know the long, if it is long, 
1. in order to know the short, if it is short, 
1. in order to know the whole breath, i.e., beginning, middle, end, successively. 

**Be notice** — during practicing in order to know the whole breath, 

1. it should not be memorized on the ‘long’ as ‘this is long’, 
1. it should not be memorized on the ‘short’ as ‘this is short’, 

**PAGE 334** 

3. it  should  not  be  memorized  on  the  ‘beginning,  middle  and  end’,  as  ‘this  is  the beginning’, ‘this is the middle’, ‘this is the end’ etc. 

If it is memorized like that way, the development of concentration can be retarded. It is essential to notice the while breath carefully as if it is any of long, short, the while breath respectively. If it is unable to practise without memorizing, it should be recognized on ‘**the in-breath**’, ‘**the out-breath**’ only. 

During practicing in this way, the ***meditator*** should discern continuously in order to know apparently on long, short, from beginning to end of the whole breath. It should not be tried intentionally in order to become long or short but taken into heart the breath as it’s natural condition. It should be tried to know long or short condition of the breaths as they really are. It should be tried in order to occur subtler and subtler breaths successively. If it is practiced like that way gross and rough breaths will become subtler and subtler with the result  that  the  whole breath  will be  ceased  and both physical  and  mental  situations  will become agile. 

When gross in-breath and out-breath cease in the continuum of that ***meditator*** the mind of meditation which has the object of sign of subtle in-breath and out-breath would be appeared. When those minds of meditation which have object of subtle in-breath and out- breath cease, successive minds of meditation which have objects of subtler and subtler in- breath and out-breath would be appeared. How it would be appeared —, 

A man hits bronze gong with iron rod resulting in arising of noisily sounds. The mind which has the object of gross sound appears in him previously. When gross sounds disappear the mind which has object of sign of subtle sounds would be occurred. As those minds which have objects of signs of subtler and subtler sounds occur successively after preceding ones disappeared, similarly, minds of meditation which have objects of subtler and subtler in- breath and out-breath  also appear in the ***meditator***. It should be understood in this way. (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-275) 

**PAGE 335** 

45. **Differences of *ānāpānassati* from other meditation subjects** 

Differences of the mindfulness of breathing from other meditation subjects are as 

follows: 

Other meditation subjects, out of the practice of mindfulness of breathing, have more and  more  apparent  objects  as  if  maturation  of  the  practices  becomes  higher  and  higher. However, the practice of the mindfulness of breathing is quite different from those meditation subjects. Actually, the objects of this meditation subject gradually subtle and subtle in the insight of ***meditator*** who is practicing by following strictly instructions of the Buddha. The object of in-breath and out-breath becomes unapparent in the insight of ***meditator***. It should not be given up the practice and should not stand up from sitting deportment in order to either discuss this problem with meditation teacher or take into heart that “now is it fallen back my practice”. The fault is as follows. 

*iriyāpatham*   *vikopettvā  gacchato  hi  kammat* *t* *ānam*   *navanavameva  hoti*,  *tasmā yathānisinneneva desato āharitabbam* . (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-275)** 

In the continuum of *bhikkhu* who always stands up from sitting position of practice, usual  practice  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  always  becomes  newly  one  only.  It  should, therefore, be carried out the practice continuously by means of previous memorized touching place of the in-breath and out-breath in usual sitting position. (*Visuddhi Magga* -1-275) 

In  regarding  to  commentator’s  words,  “in  the  continuum  of  *bhikkhu*  who  always stands up from sitting position of practice, usual practice of mindfulness of breathing always becomes newly ones only”, some noble teachers assumed that usual deportment should not be changed during meditation is carrying out continuously. Indeed, this word refer to only such person who has unapparent object of in-breath and out-breath must not to stand up from sitting  deportment,  but  not  for  every  persons  who  practise  various  meditation  subjects commonly. It should be read the followings not to be misunderstood on the fact “whether deportment can be changed or not”. 

46. **Whether deportment can be changed or not** 

*samiñjite  pasāriteti  pabbānam*   *samiñjanapasārane* .  *tattha  cittavaseneva samiñjanapasāranam*   *akattvā  hatthapādānam*   *samiñjanapasāran* *apaccayā  atthānattham*  *pariggahettvā  atthapariggahanam*   *sātthakasampajaññam* *.  tattha  hatthapāde  aticiram*  *samiñjettvā pasārettvā eva vā thitassa khan* *e khan* *e vedanā uppajjanti*, *cittam*  *ekkaggam*  *na labhati*,  *kammat* *t* *hānam*   *paripatati*  **,**  *visesam*   *nādhigacchati***.**  *kāle   samiñjentassa  kāle pasārentassa pana tā vedanā na uppajjanti*, *cittam*  *ekkaggam*  *hoti*, *kammat* *t* *hānam*  *phātim*  *gacchati*,  *visesamadhigacchatīti  evam*   *atthānattha  pariggahanam*   *veditabbam* .*  (*M*-Com-1- 268; *Dī*-Com-1-176; *Sam* -Com-3-228; *Abhi*-Com-2-342) 

**PAGE 336** 

“*Samiñjite pasārite*” means “when digits are bend or stretched”. When digits are bent or  stretched  it  should  not  be  done  those  actions  with  regarding  to  inner  desire  and  the knowledge  which  is  able  to  discriminate  benefit  or  harm  due  to  cause  of  bending  and stretching digits is called *sātthakasampajañña*. 

In  the  continuum  of  either  such *bhikkhu*  who  situates  a  deportment  with bending digits for a long time or such *bhikkhu* who situates a deportment with stretching digits out for a long time various sufferings with disagreeable feeling would be occurred in every moments. 

The concentration of mind of meditation cannot be achieved, and the practice usually be fallen back resulting in inability to attain successive noble *dhamma* of both mundane and supra-mundane (*lokuttara dhamma*). In the continuum of such ***meditator*** who bends digits at the time when it is suitable to bend and stretches digits at the time when it is suitable to stretch properly, those kinds of suffering cannot be occurred. The concentration of mind of meditation can be achieved and the practice would be improved resulting in ability to attain successive  noble  *dhamma*  of  both  mundane  and  supra-mundane.  Thus  it  should  be understood the meaning of “discriminate ability of knowledge”.(*M*-Com-1-268; *D*-Com-1- 176; *Sam* -Com-3-228; *Abhi*-Com-2-342) 

According to explanations found in above commentaries, bending and stretching of digits in proper time is a cause of improvement of practice, and therefore the ***meditator*** who wants to attain *nibbāna* should not practise irrespective of those explanations. 

47. **Occurrence of newly ones** 

If  the  ***meditator***  stands  up  from  usual  practice  in  sitting  deportment  due  to disappearance of the object of in-breath and out-breath in the insight, it will be occurred in newly process of practice again and again due to the following reasons. — 

If he practise the practice of mindfulness of breathing again, the in-breath and out- breath will become unapparent in his insight again similar to previous processes. If he stands up and give up the practice again and again whenever the object becomes unapparent ones, then it will be occurred unapparently again and again. Thus it can be said that the practice will become newly ones again and again. 

48. **The reason why the breath is unapparent** 

When the breaths are unapparent in the insight of ***meditator***, previous sign of touching place of in-breath and out-breath should be taken into heart by reasoning as follows: 

**PAGE 337** 

The *bhikkhu*, when in-breath and out-breath are unapparent in insight, should reason frequently in this way. — 

Where are in-breath and out-breath present? Where are not those present? In whose continuum do those breaths occur? In whose continuum do not those breaths occur? Etc.. 

49. **Persons without in-breath and out-breath** 

These persons are lack of in-breath and out-breath, 

1. foetus in the womb, 
1. person who is submerged, 

[These two persons lack breaths due to inability to occur breaths in those places.] 

3. person who is in coma, or mindless being, 
3. person who was dead (corpse), 
3. non-returnee  (*anāgāmi*)  and  arahant  (*arahat*),  who  are  entering  into  cessation absorption (*nirodha samāpatti*), 

[These three persons lack breaths due to  absence of  mind during  entering into  cessation absorption.] 

6. the person who is entering into the fourth absorption (*catuttha jhāna samāpatti*), 
6. brahmas of the world of form and formless world, 

[These two persons lack breaths due to fixed nature of beings.] 

It should be complained himself that he himself is excluded from those list. Then it should be reasoned again that … 

“there are no places without occurring breaths except those seven places and the in- breath  and  out-breath  are  present  surely  in  your  continuum,  indeed;  although  these  are present, it is unable to keep in mind the breaths due to the knowledge is weak and retarded ”… 

Then the ***meditator*** should try to occur mind of meditation is fixed together with the touching place of usual in-breath and out-breath which is present before disappeared. These in-breath and out-breath usually occur by touching the tip of nose for such person with long nose, while they occur by touching the upper lip for such person with short nose. Therefore, the *bhikkhu* who has unapparent  

**PAGE 338** 

breaths, should try to occur fixed sign of perception of the practice (*bhāvanā saññā*) at the touching place of in-breath and out-breath but should not to occur the breaths roughly. It is right. — The Buddha, therefore, preached as follows respective of this reason. 

*nāham*  *bhikkhave mut* *t* *hasatissa asampajānassa ānāpānasatibhāvanam*  *vadāmi*. (*M*-3- 127; *Sam*-3-294)** 

- *Bhikkhus*! I never preach the practice of mindfulness of breathing for a person who 

lacks clear comprehension which is able to distinguish in-breath and out-breath ; who has perishable mindfulness. (*M*-3-127; *Sam*-3-294; *Visuddhi Magga*-1-275) 

Every practice of *samatha* and *vipassanā* can be fulfilled by the only person who has mindfulness and clear comprehension, indeed. However, in the continuum of ***meditator*** who is practicing any other meditation subject excluding mindfulness of breathing, the object of the practice always becomes apparently. This practice of mindfulness of breathing is very difficult. It is the field of Noble Gentlemen called the Supreme Buddha, *pacceka buddha* and disciples* of the Buddha (*buddha putta*) only. This kind of practice is not a little piece indeed. Then it is not a kind of practice which can be performed by inferior ones. The practice of mindfulness of breathing should be taken into heart by means of such modes. It will becomes subtle and calm by that that means. Therefore, both very strong mindfulness and knowledge are essential to the way of practice called the mindfulness of breathing. 

As very fine and minute needle is essential when very fine lower dressing is sewing and as finer needle which can be applied to make minute needle is also essential, very strong mindfulness which is similar to fine needle and knowledge which is similar to finer needle to make  fine  needle  are  essential  during  the  practice  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  which  is similar  to  very  fine  lower  dressing  is  developing  similarly.  Then  the  *bhikkhu*  who  has fulfilled with those mindfulness and knowledge, should not find those in-breath and out- breath at any other places out of touching place. 

As a simile — The peasant takes rest under shade of a tree after the field had been ploughed. At that time two bullocks enter rapidly into the forest. If the clever peasant wants to plough again by yoking with those bullocks, he never seek the latter by following footprint 

of them in the forest. **PAGE 339** 

Actually, he is handling with rope and driving stick and going to stream where those bullocks usually come and drink water every day. He is waiting for his bullocks by either sitting or reclining near the stream. When he see his bullocks that returned from the stream where they had taken bath or drinking after they grazed in the forest the whole day he ties them  up  with  a  rope  and  brings  back  to  the  field.  Then  he  performs  his  usual  work, ploughing, again. Similarly the meditating *bhikkhu* should not find in-breath and out-breath at any other place excluding touching place. 

As a simile — It should be taken into heart the in-breath and out-breath by fixing the mind of meditation with the touching place, i.e., the tip of the nose or upper lip after handling a rope called mindfulness and a driving stick called knowledge. The result is that — the *bhikkhu* who practices in this way can take the object of in-breath and out-breath as the bullocks reach at the bank of stream where they usual take bath. Then that *bhikkhu* should practise repeatedly by tying bullocks of in-breath and out-breath with the rope of mindfulness at the tying rod of touching place after it is driven by driving stick of knowledge associated with the attention (*manasīkāra*) which is the nature of control to direct the mind and its concomitants towards the objects of in-breath and out-breath. 

50. **Sign of neighbourhood  concentration (*uggaha nimitta*) and sign of full concentration (*pat***  ***i***  ***bhāga nimitta*)** 

In the continuum of ***meditator*** who is strenuous practicing in this way the sign of neighbourhood  or full concentration would be occurred apparently not soon later. That sign is not identical among all ***meditators***. Actually, it is appeared as the shape of any of 

1. cotton wool, 
1. spinning cotton, or  
1. a jet of air, said by famous elder teachers. (*Visuddhi Magga*-1-276) 

The  followings  are  **decrees  of  the  shape  of  various  signs  in  accordance  with commentaries**. 

In some ***meditators***, the sign is appeared as 

4. brilliant light of star 
4. ruby 
4. pearl. 

**PAGE 340** 

Due to presence of rough impression, in some ***meditators***, it appears as 

7. bamboo rod or 
7. wooden spit 

In some ***meditators***, it appears as any of 

9. long thread, 
9. garland with various flowers, or 
9. cloud. 

In some ***meditators***, it appears as any of 

12. spider’s web, 
12. stratified cloud, 
12. lotus, 
12. wheel of stage-coach, 
12. the sun, or 
12. the moon. (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-277) 

***nimitta**nti  uggahanimittam* ,  *pat* *ibhāganimittam*   *vā*,  *ubhayampi  hi  idha  ekkajjham*  *vuttam* .  *tathā  hi  tūlapicuādiupamatayam*   *uggahe  yujjati*,  *sesam*   *ubhayattha*.  *pa*. *man* *igul* *ikādiupamā pat* *ibhāge vat* *t* *anti*.*  (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-335)** 

According  to  explanation  of  the  sub-commentator,  those  three  kinds  of  signs  of concentration which appear as cotton wool, spinning cotton or a jet of air, are called *uggaha nimitta* (sign of neighbourhood  concentration). Those two kinds of signs of concentration which  appear  as  ruby  or  pearl  are  called  *pat* *ibhāga  nimitta*.  The  remaining  signs  of concentration may be occurred both signs of neighbourhood  and full concentration. The sign of neighbourhood  concentration is not brilliant but that of full concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*),very brilliant in colour. Thus, it should be recognized on difference between two kinds of signs of concentration. (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-335) 

51. **Variation in perception of practice** 

One day, many *bhikkhus* are sitting and reciting one discourse (*suttanta*) containing in Pāl i Text. During sitting one of those *bhikkhus* asks “How do you appear this discourse in your knowledge?” 

One *bhikkhu* answers “It appears as the big river flowing from the mountain.” Another *bhikkhu* answers “It appears as a forest.” 

The third one answers “It appears as a big tree, which has burden of forage and fruits resulting in the presence of cold shade.” 

**PAGE 341** 

The reason why various signs appear is that — there are various perceptions of a single discourse among the continuum of those *bhikkhus*, indeed. 

*evam*   *ekameva  kammat* *t* *hānam*   *saññānānatāya  nānato  upat* *t* *hāti*.  *saññajañhi  etam*  *saññānidānam*   *saññāpabhavam* .  *tasmā  saññānānattāya  nānato  upat* *t* *ātīti  veditabbam* . (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-277)** 

*saññānānatāyāti  nimittupat* *t* *hānato  pubbeva  pavattasaññānam*   *nānāvidhabhāvato*. (*Mahāt* *ī*-1-335) 

A single practice of mindfulness of breathing can gives rise to various shape of sign of concentration due to presence of various perceptions of practice which occur previously in the continuum of ***meditator***. It is right. — The sign of neighbourhood  concentration, sign of full  concentration  which  are  the  objects  of  the  mindfulness  of  breathing  are  caused  by perception of practice (*bhāvanā saññā*). It’s fundamental factor is the perception of practice only. It is originated from perception of practice. It should be recognized the fact that various shapes  of  sign  of  concentration  would  be  appeared  in  ***meditators***  due  to  variation  in perception of practice of those ***meditators***. (*Visuddhi Magga*-1-277, *Mahāt* *ī*-1-335) 

It  means  that  when  the  efficiency  of  concentration association  with perception  of practice become sharp and strong, if such kind of perception of practice, i.e., “may it become white,  or  red  or  pearl  or  glass  ball  etc.”,  will  be  made,  various  shapes  of  signs  of concentration of those kinds will be occurred accordingly. However, it can be occurred only when the concentration matured successfully. 

It should be recognized that those signs of neighbourhood  and full concentration are “conceptual *dhamma*” only due to occurrence of those signs free from original object of in- breath and out-breath according to ***Abhidhammattha sańgaha***. It should be continued to read the following explanations of commentary and sub-commentary. 

52. ***navattabba dhammāramman***  ***a*****   

*tattha  dasavidhampi  kasinajjhānam*   *kasinapan* *na*  *ttim*   *ārabbha  pavattattā*, *brahmavihāracatuttham*   *sattapan* *n* *attim***   *ārabbha***  *pavattattā*,  *ānāpānacatuttham*   *nimittam*  *ārabbha pavattattā parittādivasena navattabbhadhammāramman* *ato navattabbāramman* *am*  *nāma hoti*.* (*Abhi*-Com-1-440)** 

Among those fourth absorptions, both the *kasin* *a* absorptions which are occurred by taking  10  kinds  of  *kasin* *a*-objects;  the  fourth  absorption  of  four  boundless  states (*appamaññā*), which is occurred by taking the object of concept of beings; and the fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing which is occurred by taking the object of 

**PAGE 342** 

brilliant star-like sign of full concentration, are not deserving to designate as 

1. sensual *dhamma* (*paritta dhamma*) 
1. supreme *dhamma* (*mahaggata dhamma*) 
1. supra-mundane  *dhamma*  (*appamān* *a  dhamma*),  but  as  *navattabbāramman* *a*  due  to presence of the object of conceptual *dhamma* (*paññatti dhamma*). (*Abhi*-1-440) 

All kinds of objects which are not deserving to designate as above three *dhamma*s are also conceptual *dhamma* only. 

***navattabbārammanā***    *ti  idam*   *pana  vacanam*   *yathāgahitākārassa  saññāvisayassa navattabbatam*   *sandhāya  navattabbam*   *āramman* *am*   *etesanti  navattabbāramman* *ā*, *cittuppādāti aññapadattha samāsam*  *kattvā at* *t* *hakathāyam*  *vuttam* . (*Mūlat* *ī*-1-191)** 

The meaning of above quotation is as follows. 

The corporeality is present apparently, such as the nature of earth-element, etc.. But it is not present apparently by means of impression on the object (*phusana*), etc.. (It is because corporeal *dhamma* is *anāramman* *a dhamma* which is incapable of taking the object, indeed.) Thus, as a single the ultimate *dhamma* can be known as two ways, i.e., “it is not present apparently”, “it is present apparently”, (*avijjamāna-vijjamāna*), above mentioned concepts of *kasin* *a* and sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing are not only *avijjamāna*, due to absence in the aspect of ultimate reality, but also *vijjamāna*, due to presence in the aspect  of  conventional  truth  (*samuti  sacca*).  Those  kinds  of  concepts,  therefore,  can  be designated as “*navattabbāramman* *a*” and then those arising of mind and mental concomitants of absorption which take the object of that concept is called the *dhamma* which has the object of “*navattabāramman* *a*”. 

Although those objects called *navattabba* are not present obviously in the ultimate sense,  it  can  be  designated  as  concept  (*paññatti*)  due  to  occurrence  of  the  basis  of  the meaning of speech in the aspect of conventional truth (*vohāra sacca*). It is right. — That conventional truth consists of two kinds of concepts which are able to be known and the commentator explained on that kind of concept as *avijjamāna* *paññatti* (= it is not present obviously in ultimate sense). 

It is unable to say on that object as “this so-called *dhamma* is the object of sensual *dhamma*” because it is not present obviously in the ultimate sense while such concept, the eye-clear-sensitivity etc., which is present apparently in the ultimate sense, is able to say in that way. Usual in-breath and out-breath are a group of corporeal units called sound nonads produced by mind (*cittajasaddanavaka*  

**PAGE 343** 

*kalāpa*). Those corporeal *dhamma*s are sensual *dhamma* called *paritta*, indeed. Although the perception of practice is occurred by taken into heart as the sensual *dhamma* for a ***meditator*** in  the  beginning  stage,  when  the  sign  of  full  concentration  occurs  in  the  insight  that perception of practice face with that object of sign of full concentration. Because of this reason, the commentator Sayadaw explained that that perception of the practice or the fourth absorption of the mindfulness of absorption …etc., are the *dhamma* which take the object of concept of *navattabba dhamma*. (See *Mūlat* *īkā*-1-191 in detailed) 

53. **Three *dhamma*s that should be fulfilled** 

*ettha  ca  aññameva  assāsāramman* *am  cittam* ,  *aññam*   *passāsāramman* *am*,  *aññam*  *nimittāramman* *am*. *yassa hi ime tayo dhammā natthi*, *tassa kammat* *t* *hānam*  *neva appanām*  *na upacaram*  *pāpun* *āti*. *yassa pana ime tayo dhammā atthi*, *tasseva kammat* *t* *hānam*  *upacārañca appanañca pāpun* *āti*.** (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-277) 

Among  these  three  *dhamma*s,  in-breath,  out-breath  and  sign  of  full  concentration (*nimitta*), 

1. the mind of meditation, which has the object of in-breath, is a specific one, 
1. the mind of meditation, which has the object of out-breath, is a specific one, 
1. the mind of meditation, which has the object of full concentration, is a specific one. 

In the continuum of such ***meditator*** these three *dhamma*s, in-breath, out-breath and sign of full concentration, are not present, that person is unable to reach the full absorption by the practice of mindfulness of breathing. As a right saying is that — in the continuum of such ***meditator***, these three *dhamma*s are present, with the result that the practice of mindfulness of breathing is available to be attained the full absorption (= full concentration) for that person only. It is also available to be attained the neighbourhood  concentration and absorption. Thus it should be recognized well. (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-277) 

54. **the admonishment of *dīghabhāna***    ***ka thera* and *majjhimabhāna***    ***ka thera*** 

Those  noble  teachers  who  memorized  the  Long  Discourses  of  the  Buddha (*dīghabhān* *aka thera*) admonished as follows: 

When very brilliant sign of full concentration appeared in him, that *bhikkhu* went to his teacher and said ‘*bhante*…this kind of sign of concentration appeared in the insight of me.’ The teacher should reply neither supporting as a real sign of full concentration nor against as non-real sign of full concentration. However, he should say ‘*Āvuso*…the ***meditator*** who is practising the mindfulness of breathing can be appeared by means of this way’ and should urge him to take into heart that way of practice frequently. It is right. — If he decides as  the  sign  of  full  concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing,  it  will  be  reached  into relinquishing  the  practice  of  him.  The  mind  of  meditation  can  be  fallen  back  from  the achievement  of  practice.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  says  that  it  is  not  real  sign  of  full concentration, the ***meditator*** will be reached into wither and disgusted the practice on which his  

**PAGE 344** 

desire to practice can be lost. Therefore those *mahāthera* admonished not to reply whether the sign is real or not, but to urge farther practice frequently. 

However, those noble teachers who memorized the Middle Discourses of the Buddha (*majjhima bhān* *aka thera*), admonished that the teacher should like to say, ‘*āvuso*…this kind of appearance in the insight can be called the sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing.  You  are  doing  well…You  should  like  to  develop  this  practice  frequently’. (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-277) 

“*imāya pat* *ipadāya jarāmaran* *ato muccissāmīti pat* *ipannassa nimitta*”*nti vutte katham*  *sańkocāpatti*,  *bhiyyoso  mattāya  ussāhameva  kareyyāti* —  “***nimittamidam***  .   *pa*.  ***vattabbo***”*ti **majjhimabhān***  ***a***  ***kā** āhu*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-336) 

- Why will it be reached into relinquishing the practice of him and why can the mind 

of meditation be fallen back in the continuum of ***meditator*** as if even the teacher says… ‘it is the  sign  of  concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing’.  ‘The  ***meditator***  will  endeavour strenuously the practice of mindfulness of breathing’, assumed by *majjhima bhān* *aka thera* and then they admonished as mentioned above. (*Mahāt* *īkā* –1-336) 

55. **It would be reached “fixed condition” (*t***  ***h***  ***apanā*)** 

` `*athānena nimitteyeva cittam*  *t* *hapetabbam* . *evamassāyam*  *ito pabhuti t* *hapanāvasena bhāvanā hoti*. *vuttañhetam*  *porān* *ehi* — 

“*nimitta t* *hapayam*  *cittam* , *nānākāram*  *vibhāvayam* . 

` `*dhīro assāsapassāse*, *sakam*  *cittam*  *nibandhatī*”*ti*. (*Visuddhi Magga* –1-277,278) 

Then the practicing *bhikkhu* must try to fix mind of meditation with the object of sign of concentration. If it is possible to fix in this way, in the continuum of this *bhikkhu*, the concentration by practice of mindfulness of breathing becomes apparently by means of ability of ***t*** ***h***   ***apanā***. It is right. — The elder commentator Sayadaw said as follows: 

“If the practicing *bhikkhu* who had fulfilled strenuous effort called *sammāvāyāma maggańga*, is able to fix mind of meditation with the sign of full concentration, which is originated from usual object of in-breath and out-breath, after four modes of appearance of those breaths, i.e., 

**PAGE 345** 

1. long in-breath, 
1. long out-breath, 
1. short in-breath, 
1. short out-breath, had been disappeared, it can be called his mind of meditation would be fixed with the object of sign of full concentration up to the full absorption.” (It should be recognized that such situation at which mind of meditation would be fixed with the object of sign of full concentration is called “*t* *hapanā*”. (*Visuddhi Magga* –1- 277,278) 

*pubbe yam*  *vuttam**  “*anubandhanāya ca phusanāya ca t* *hapanāya ca manasi karotī*”*ti*. *tattha  anubandhanam* ,  *phusanañca  vissajjetvā  **th***    ***apanāvasena  bhāvanā  hotī**ti t* *hapanāvaseneva bhāvetabbanti attho*. (*Mahāt* *īkā* 1-336) 

The *Visuddhi Magga* commentator Sayadaw explained in *Visuddhi Magga* 1-272 that if  either  the  mindfulness  always  follows  along  with  those  in-breath  and  out-breath continuously at the touching place after the counting method has been omitted or the mind of meditation  is  able  to  fix  with  the  object  of  brilliant  white  sign  of  full  concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*) which usually appears as a consequence of full absorption, the way of practice by which the mindfulness of breathing to be performed, can be designated as any of *anubhandhanā naya* or *phusanā naya* or *t* *hapanā naya*. With regarding to this explanation, it means  that  when  the  sign  of  full  concentration  is  stable  in  the  knowledge,  it  must  be relinquished *anubhandhanā* *naya* and *phusanā* *naya* and faced with the object of the sign of full concentration and then mind of meditation must be fixed with that object in order to occur full absorption (*appanā jhāna*). (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-336) 

If the mind of meditation is able to be fixed on the object of sign of full concentration up to the full absorption, these three *dhamma*s 

**PAGE 346** 

1. the in-breath, 
1. the out-breath, 
1. the sign of full concentration, 

become a single object of the mind of meditation due to capable of relinquishing the usual objects  of  in-breath  and  out-breath.  It  is  not  impossible  to  appear  in  a  single  mind  of meditation but possible indeed. (Pyi Sayadaw’s translation-2-248, 249) 

56. **Possibility of the object of single mind of meditation** 

*nimittam*  *assāsapassāsā*, *anāramman* *amekacittassa*. 

*ajānato tayo dhamme*, *bhāvanānupalabbhati*. 

*nimittam*  *assāsapassāsā*, *anāramman* *amekacittassa*. 

*jānato  tayo  dhamme*,  *bhāvanā  upalabbhati*.  (*Visuddhi  Magga*-1-277)(*Vimatit* *īkā*-1-

216,217) 

=These three *dhamma*s, (1) *nimitta* called nostril or upper lip at which discerning mind of meditation is fixed, (2) the in-breath, (3) the out-breath, are not the objects of one consciousness simultaneously. Although it is not in that way any ***meditator*** who does not know those three *dhamma*s by taking as object is unable to develop the concentration of mindfulness of breathing. (*Visuddhi Magga*-1-277) 

Three kinds of *dhamma*s called *nimitta* (touching place), the in-breath and out-breath are not the objects of one consciousness simultaneously due to inability to occur both usual in-breath and out-breath within one thought process. It means that either *nimitta* and in-breath or *nimitta* and out-breath are able to occur the objects of a single thought process within one thought process simultaneously. (*Vimatit* *īkā*-1-216,217) 

This explanation is intended to be explained tip of nostril or upper lip called *nimitta*, the in-breath and out-breath before the sign of neighbourhood  concentration or the sign of full concentration appear. 

After  the  concentration  of  the  practice  has  been  matured  and  when  signs  of  full concentration appear, it can be said that 

1. *nimitta* means the sign of full concentration, 
1. the in-breath means the sign of full concentration, 
1. the out-breath means the sign of full concentration. 

**PAGE 347** 

*assāsapassāse nissāya uppannanimittampettha assāsapassāsasamaññameva vuttam* . (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-319) 

- It  is  because  the  fact  that  it  can  be  said  the  sign  of  neighbourhood   or  full 

concentration, which occurs depending upon in-breath and out-breath, as the in-breath and out-breath, indeed. 

Thus when the mind of meditation is being able to fix with object of brilliant sign of full concentration, these three *dhamma*s called *nimitta*, the in-breath and out-breath become a single object of mind of meditation. It should be recognized that the practice of mindfulness of breathing would be fulfilled up to the full absorption due to capable of taking those three *dhamma*s as single object by single mind-door thought process. 

57. **Difficulties to be encountered** 

It can be found that some ***meditators*** encounter with difficulties in this stage. In some persons the light usually appears beforehand when the concentration is well developed, while the  sign  of  concentration  appears  beforehand  in  some  persons.  If  the  light  appears beforehand, it should be emphasized on that light but on usual objects of in-breath and out- breath. If the touching place is neglected and mind of meditation follows the light, the way of practice becomes leading to be wrong. It should, therefore, be fixed the mind with in-breath and out-breath only at the touching place. Not soon later, the sign of concentration usually appears as opaque grey colour. Only when the efficiency of the practice becomes mature and strong, can the sign be clear white as a cotton plug or cloud. In most ***meditators*** the sign of concentration which is similar to fluorescent light usually appears. 

However,  those  kinds  of  signs  of  concentration  are  not  stable  and  it  appear discontinuously in most ***meditators*** of beginners. At that time it is essential to be fixed the mind of meditation with the objects of in-breath and out-breath. When the mind of meditation fixed with the objects of in-breath and out-breath for a long time, that sign of concentration becomes stable in the insight resulting unique object of both in-breath and out-breath and sign of concentration. If it is so, the way of practice leads to right one. 

When the breaths and sign of full concentration become oneness, mind of meditation usually fixes with the sign of full concentration. If it is so, it should be tried continuously in order to fix mind of meditation with that sign. 

**PAGE 348** 

If the mind of meditation is unable to fix with sign of concentration although the latter is stable, it must be tried again and again. It must be performed in order to develop the concentration continuously. 

However,  in  some  ***meditators***,  if  mind  of  meditation  is  shifted  on  the  sign  of concentration after the objects of in-breath and out-breath has bees relinquished, that sign of concentration usually disappears not soon later. At that time the mind of meditation must be shifted on the objects of in-breath and out-breath again.  When the sign of concentration reappears and become stable object, the mind of meditation must be fixed on it. In this way, it must be practiced  appreciatively in order to fix the mind of  meditation with the sign of concentration for a long time. It must be noticed that during trying to fix mind of meditation with sign of concentration, it should not be shifted on the breaths frequently. Alternative discerning on usual breaths and the sign of concentration can cause falling back and stability of concentration resulting in wandering between two kinds of objects. 

58. **If the sign appears in distance** 

In  some  ***meditators***  the  sign  of  concentration  usually  appears  in  distance  from touching place as moon-shaped, etc…while the sign of concentration is similar to a covering of white light over the whole face in some ***meditators***. The mind of meditation is able to fix with distant sign of concentration sometimes and it is unable to fix sometimes. 

If  it  is  able  to  fix  with  distant  sign  of  concentration,  that  concentration  must  be developed continuously in order to attain stability for long time. However it is quite distant from touching place the concentration cannot be stable for long time and it is difficult to develop efficiently. 

If it is unable to fix with distant sign of concentration, the mind of meditation must be put on usual objects of in-breath and out-breath again. Then it must be tried appreciatively in order to know the  

**PAGE 349** 

whole  breaths  from  beginning  to  end.  When  the  efficiency  of  concentration  becomes powerful the sign of concentration usually appears close to the touching place again. When that sign of concentration becomes stable and the breaths and the sign becomes oneness it must be tried appreciatively in order to fix mind of meditation with that sign continuously. 

Newly emerged sign of concentration usually appears as unstable one. If the mind of meditation is intended to be shifted of unstable sign of concentration, the former becomes unstable one. It should, therefore, be fulfilled in order to fix mind of meditation on the sign of concentration only when the latter becomes stable one. 

When the mind of meditation fixes with the sign of concentration, the latter gradually changes to clear white from greyish white. The sign of concentration which is clear white in colour can be designated as the sign of neighbourhood  concentration (*uggaha nimitta*). When the efficiency of concentration becomes powerful the sign of concentration becomes brilliant in  colour.  The  brilliant  star-like  sign  of  concentration  is  designated  as  sign  of  full concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*). However, different colours of signs of concentration can also appear sometimes. 

59. **It  should  not  be  emphasized  on  colour  and  character  of  sign  of concentration** 

*tassevam*   *nimittupat* *t* *hānato  pabhuti  nīvaran* *āti  vikkhambhitāneva  honti*,  *kilesā sannisinnāva*.  *sati  upat* *t* *hitāyeva*.  *cittam*   *upacārasamādhinā  samāhitameva*.  *athānena  tam*  *nimittam*   *neva  van* *n* *ato  manasikātabbam* ,  *na  lakkhan* *ato  paccavakkhitabbam* .  *apica  kho khattiyamahesiyā cakkavattigabbho viya kassakena sāliyavagabbho viya ca āvāsādīni satta asappāyāni vajjetvā tāneva satta sappāyāni sevantena sādhukam*  *rakkhitabbam* . *atha nam*  *evam*   *rakkhitvā  punappunam*   *manasikāravasena  vuddhim*   *virūl* *im*   *gamayitvā  dasa  vidhim*  *appanākosallam*   *sampādetabbam*,   *vīriyasamatā  yojetabbā*.  *tassevam*   *ghate* *ntassa pathavīkasin* *e  vuttānukkameva  tasmim*   *nimitta  catukkapañcakajjhānāni  nibbattanti*. (*Visuddhi Magga*-1-278) 

***van***  ***n***    ***a***  ***to**ti  picupin* *d* *atārakarūpādīsu  viya  upat* *th*  *itavann*  *a*  *to*.  ***lakkhan***  ***n***  ***a***    ***to**ti kharabhāvādisabhāvato*,  *aniccādilakkhan* *ato  vā*.  *rakkhitabbam*   *tam*   *nimittanti  sambandho*. *nimittassa rakkhan* *am*  *nāma tattha pat* *iladdhassa upacārajhānassa rakkhan* *eneva hotīti āha* “***punappunam******    ***m***  ***anasikāravasena vuddhim***    ***v*** ***irūl***  ***i***  ***m******    ***g*** ***amayitvā***”*ti*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-337) 

Thus that ***meditator*** is able to remove hindrances (*nīvaran* *a*) as soon as the sign of full concentration appears in him. Those various defilements (*kilesā*) are also deposited for a while.  The  mindfulness  (*sati*)  leading  to  and  situating  on  the  object  of  sign  of  full concentration. The mind of meditation is stable on that object by means of the neighbourhood  concentration (*upacāra samādhi*). 

**PAGE 350** 

The  ***meditator***  must  emphasize  on  neither  the  colour,  such  as  cotton  wool,  star etc…nor  the  specific  character,  such  as  roughness,  hardness,  etc…of  the  sign  of  full concentration. It should not be also emphasized on general characters, such as impermanence (*anicca*), suffering (*dukkha*), etc…of that sign. 

Actually,  that  object  of  sign  of  concentration  should  be  protected  respectfully  by means of approaching to seven kinds of favourable conditions (*sappāya*) but avoiding to seven kinds of unfavourable conditions (*asappāya*) similar to the chief queen of *khattiya* king protects the foetus of *cakkavatti* who will become the supreme king of universe, that is visible as putting in the glass casket,…or similar to the farmer protects buds of *sāliyava* rice. 

[As if the neighbourhood  absorption called the neighbourhood  concentration which is attained by taking the object of sign of full concentration (*pat* *ibhāga nimitta*), can be well protected, the protection of that sign of full concentration will be fulfilled mutually. The ***meditator***, therefore, should discern repeatedly on that object of sign of full concentration in order to develop the powerful concentration of practice successively. Strenuous practicing in that way can be called protecting of the object of sign of full concentration not to disappear.] 

Then it should be fulfilled on ten kinds of *appanākosalla dhammas* (mastery of the full absorption) by means of repeated discerning on that sign. It should be balanced between effort (*viriya*) and concentration (*samādhi*) appreciatively. 

In  the  continuum  of  the  ***meditator***  who  is  performing  in  this  way,  the  fourth absorption  and  fifth  absorption  can  be  appeared  by  taking  the  object  of  sign  of  full concentration  similar  to  explanation  of  the  earth-*kasin* *a*  (*pathavīkasin* *a*)  mentioned previously. (*Visuddhi Magga*-1-278) 

The ***meditator***  must  mastery  of  the  following  conditions  in  order to  maintain  the concentration of practice and the object of sign of full concentration simultaneously. Those 

are: 

1. seven kinds of unfavourable conditions (*asappāya*) which must be abstained 
1. seven kinds of favourable conditions (*sappāya*) which must be performed 
1. ten kinds of mastery of full absorption (*appanākosalla*) 
1. how to balance the effort and concentration. 

Therefore it would be continued to explain those four conditions. 

**PAGE 351** 
PAGE41
