***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

***NIBBĀNA*** GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**THE CONCENTRATION SHOULOD BE DEVELOPED** 

**VOLUME I Page 451 – 500** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiṭakadhara*)** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE43

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 

**PAGE 451** 

The mind of meditation which is supported by means of such mode of effort, does not falls into one extremity of laziness. Although the effort supports the mind of meditation by means of that mode, the mind of meditation, due to presence to supporting factor of concentration in order to balance with effort, neutralizes well (on the object of sign of full concentration). The controlling faculty of wisdom (*paññindare*) is predominant by means of equanimity (*tatramajjhattupekkhā*) and knowing of all process thoroughly (*pārihāriya* *ñān* *a*). Owing to occurrence of predominant controlling faculty of wisdom, for a person who neutralizes the object of sign of full concentration, the mind of meditation escapes from defilements by means of efficiency of equanimity. By means of escaping from defilements and efficiency of knowledge which is penetrative knowing on the sign of full concentration, the controlling faculty of wisdom is well predominant. Owing to deliverance from defilements those *dhamma* with faith, wisdom, concentration, effort, have harmonious functions. Owing to presence of harmonious functions of controlling faculties, the concentration of first absorption of mindfulness of breathing would be appeared”. 

(*Pat* *isambhidā Magga*-221) 

Owing to obvious occurrence of function of knowledge by means of equanimity, it is explained that the satisfying of mind of meditation which is the “function of wisdom of full absorption” (*appanāpaññā*), as the end of concentration of first absorption. — (4) (*Visuddhi*-

1-145) 

Thus\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. by means of ***pat*** ***i***  ***p***  ***adāvisuddhi*** with which three kinds of purification of the path leading to the first absorption, 
1. by means of developing *tatramajjhattupekhā* of three kinds called ***uppekkhābyūhanā***, and 
1. four kinds of satisfaction of mind of meditation called ***sampahams***    ***anā*** had been fulfilled. Therefore it should be recognized on those threefold good qualities and tenfold 

characteristics which can be occurred in the first absorption only. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-175) 

21. **The meaning of absorption (*jhāna*)** 

*āramman* *ūpanijjhānato paccanīkajhāpanato vā **jhānam***    ( *Visuddhi*-1-145) 

Owing to capable of discerning penetratively and firmly fixes to the object of sign of concentration, and owing to capable of burning opposite defilements, hindrances, etc. it is designated as the  

**PAGE 452** 

**absorption** (***jhāna***). (*Visuddhi*-1-145) 

According to this explanation it should not be misunderstood on absorption as ability to enter into earth, flying in the sky etc. Those abilities of entering into earth and flying in the sky can be achieved by means of super-psychic knowledge (*abhiññān* *a*), indeed. 

22. **For the purpose of maintenance of long lasting in absorption** 

After that first absorption had been attained, that *meditator* should distinguishes and keeps in mind those modes similar to an archer called ‘*vālavedhi*’ who is capable of shooting tip of tail of an animal, or similar to royal cook in the palace. 

When very clever archer performs in order to shoot tip of tail of an animal the target is hit directly in such time. As the archer distinguishes and keeps in mind those modes occurring in that time of direct hit the target, such as posture of foots on the ground, style of bow, string of bow and arrow and shoots directly on tip of tail by fulfilling mode of shooting in accordance with previous memorization of mode of shooting, similarly\_\_\_\_\_ 

the *meditator* should distinguishes and keeps in mind those modes, such as “I had attained the first absorption in this time, by taking this kind of favourable  foods, by associating the person who has this kind of nature, in this Buddha’s *sāsanā* with this kind of admonishment, by means of this kind of favourable  deportment”, etc. In this way, if it is well reasoned and taken into heart those modes, although immature concentration of the first absorption would be disappeared, it will be capable of occurring that concentration of first absorption by fulfilling those modes such as favourable  foods etc. The concentration which is not proficiently studied can be achieved and it is capable of entering into it frequently. 

Then when a clever royal cook serves the king with delicious foods, his majesty is delightful to take such kind of food. As he get an extra bonus for serving his majesty with that kind of favourable  foods which has been recognized well, similarly — 

this *meditator*, if he fulfils those modes which are capable of attaining the absorption previously, such as favourable  food by which the absorption had been attained etc., will also attain the concentration of first absorption again and again. The *meditator*, therefore, should distinguish and keep in mind well those modes which are cause of attainment of absorption like the archer who can  

**PAGE 453** 

shoot direct hit to tip of tail of animal or like royal cook in palace. (*Visuddhi*-1-145,146) 

Owing to keeping in mind those modes which are cause of attainment of absorption and to fulfilling those modes thoroughly for that *meditator*, only the absorption can be fulfilled but maintenance of long lasting in absorption can not be performed. The right way is that — due to finishing to remove hindrances, sensual desire, etc., which are danger of concentration with the result that occurrence of purified condition and then maintenance of long lasting in absorption would be occurred. 

It is right. — If a such *bhikkhu* enters into the absorption, 

1) without removing sensual desire by means of reasoning on fault of sensual desire, taking into heart mode of repulsiveness (*asubha*), 
1) without performing tranquillity of body with stress by means of removing ill-will which is the cause of stress, 
1) without removing sloth and torpor by means of taking into heart causes of occurrence of *vīriyasambojjhańga*, trying in beginning stage etc.; and perception of light, 
1) without removing unrest and worries by means of taking into heart cause of occurrence of *samādhisambojjhańga*, taking into heart sign of full concentration etc., 
1) without rejecting causal *dhamma* of sceptic and conceit (*māna*) which are also danger of concentration, 

that *bhikkhu* usually emerges from absorption suddenly as either bee and wasp that enter into unclean bamboo hollow where they dwell or the king who enters into unclean royal garden. 

It would be said accordingly. — If such *bhikkhu* enters into absorption after well removing hindrances which are danger of concentration, it is possible for that *bhikkhu* in order to stay in the absorption for a whole day as either bee and wasp that enter into cleaned bamboo hollow where they dwell or the king who enters into cleaned royal garden due to lack of any danger. Owing to the reason that only when hindrances which are danger of concentration had been thoroughly rejected can the concentration be situated for long lasting time, the *meditator* who desires to maintain long lasting in the absorption must enter into that absorption after rejecting well those hindrances called the danger of absorption, indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-147) 

**PAGE 454** 

**The reasonable complaint** — Is it true that the *bhikkhu* who attained this first absorption had finished to practise the course leading to concentration of absorption after reasoning faults of sensual desire? Moreover, hasn’t he remove hindrances by means of neighbourhood  concentration even by the time that concentration occurs? It is reasonable complaint that although it is true, why it would be accept to reason faults of sensual desire again? The answer are as follows. — 

It is true that by the time this neighbourhood  concentration occurs, hindrances had been removed. Although it is true, by the time neighbourhood  concentration occurs, it is merely removed hindrances indeed. Therefore it would be accepted to reason faults of sensual desire again for the purpose of maintenance of long lasting in absorption and in order to reject thoroughly these hindrances accordingly. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-177) 

During it is entering into the absorption hindrances had been removed actually. However when it is emerged from that absorption, those hindrances reappears again depending on unwise attention (*ayoniso manasīkāra*). Therefore the *meditator* who desires to maintain long lasting stability in the absorption, must enter that absorption after thoroughly removed hindrances whenever it occurs by means of reasoning faults of sensual desire, etc. Thus it is real meaning. 

23. **To be much longer into absorption, but lesser in reflecting** 

*tasmim*  *pana nimitta pattapat* *hamajjhānena ādikampikena samāpajjanabahulena bhavitabbam* , *na paccavekkhan* *abahulena*. *paccavekkhan* *abahulassa hi jhānańgāni thūlāni hutvā upat* *t* *hahanti*. *athassa tāni evam*  *upat* *t* *hitattā upari ussukkanāya paccayatam*  *āpajjanti*. *so appagun* *e jhāne ussukkamāno pattapat* *hamajjhānā ca parihāyati*, *na ca sakkoti dutiyam*  *pāpun* *itum* . (*Visuddhi*-1-148) 

The *meditator* who attains the first absorption as first experience (*ādikammika jhānalābhī*) must be very much to enter into the absorption but not reflect on factors of absorption actually. The reason is that — 

For a person who reflects so much on factors of absorption, that of absorption appears in gross occurrence and in weak efficiency. [Reflecting on factors of absorption is so much that those factors appear obviously resulting in gross appearance of factors of absorption. Due to incapable of reaching to occurrence of proficiently entering into absorption, although factors of absorption are apparent in knowledge, these are weak in efficiency. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-

178)] 

When it is appeared in the knowledge in that way, owing to occurrence of appearing as gross and weak efficiency for that *meditator*, it is impossible to reach the occurrence of cause of improvement  

**PAGE 455** 

of the successive upper absorptions by the practice of mindfulness of breathing. Unless the *meditator* develops mastery of acquired absorption, it will be fall back from the first absorption although he tries hard for attainment of upper absorption. It usually becomes impossible to attain the second absorption. The Buddha, therefore, preached *Gāvī upamā sutta* (*Ańg*-3-216) as follows. \_\_\_\_ 

24. **An excerpt from *Gāvī upamā sutta*** 

*Bhikkhu* … for instance, there is a cow that is foolish, un-clever , non-understanding on about pasture, unfamiliar to mountain range, staying on hill side. (One day when that cow looks far away from the top of hill, it would be seen a large pond with clear water surrounding with grass and foliages.) The suggestion would be appeared in that cow’s mind that “it is very fine to reach inexperienced place, to graze inexperienced pasture and to drink inexperienced water.” That cow, (when it goes down from the top of hill) raises hind legs without stepping fore legs in stability on the ground. That stupid cow, (due to slipping down from the top of hill), is impossible to reach inexperienced place, to grazed inexperienced pasture, to drink inexperienced water, and then it is unable to reach well original top of hill where it imagined in that way. 

The reason why it occurs in this way is that — *Bhikkhu*s … that stupid cow wanders on the mountain without understanding about pasture and mountain range, indeed. 

Similarly, *bhikkhu*s …, in this *sāsanā*, the *bhikkhu* who is stupid, (due to lack of understanding on how to reject dangers of concentration), unskilful (due to lack of understanding on mastery of the absorption), who does not know about the pasture (due to lack of understanding on the fact that mastery of absorption is the proximate cause of successive upper absorption), un-clever (due to lack of efficiency to enter absorption thoroughly), reaches into the absorption, which is avoiding from *vatthukāma* and *kilesākāma* but associating with *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*, *sukha*. 

That *bhikkhu* never develop frequently on that sign and never perform to maintain stable condition. 

**PAGE 456** 

In the continuum of mentality of that *bhikkhu*, imagination of this way, “If I am able to reach the second absorption that is associated with pleasurable interest and agreeable feeling, which are occurred by the concentration without initial and sustained application, it will be very fine”, would be appeared. 

That *bhikkhu* is incapable of performing to attain the second absorption that is associated with pleasurable interest and agreeable feeling, which are occurred by the concentration without initial and sustained application. 

In the continuum of mentality of that *bhikkhu*, imagination of this way, … “If I am able to reach the first absorption that is associated with pleasurable interest and agreeable feeling, which are occurred by avoiding from hindrances but associated with initial and sustained application after voiding of *vatthu kāma*, *kilesākāma* and unwholesome *dhamma* occurred” … would be appeared again. 

That *bhikkhu* is incapable of performing to attain the first absorption that is associated with pleasurable interest and agreeable feeling, which are occurred by the concentration without initial and sustained application. 

*Bhikkhu*s … as so-called cow that is foolish, un-clever, non-understanding on about pasture, unfamiliar to mountain range, it can be designated on that *bhikkhu* who defeats from pair, (called the first and second absorption), who diminishes from pair. (*Ańg*-3-216) 

If it is strenuously tried hard to attain the upper absorption without practicing to attain mastery of acquired absorption, it will usually be fallen back from acquired absorption and then due to impossible to improve upper absorption, it would be thoroughly practiced to have five kinds of mastery (*vasī*) in the first absorption. 

25. **Five kinds of mastery (*vasī*)** 

***Vasī*** means to have learnt or understood, occurring in accordance with one’s desire, mastery, the ability to occur in accordance with one’s desire. There are five kinds of mastery (*vasī*), mastery of adverting (*āvajjanavasī*), mastery of attaining (*samāpajjanavasī*), mastery of resolve (*adhit* *t* *hānavasī*), mastery of emerging (*vut* *t* *hānavasī*) and mastery of reflecting (*paccavekkhan* *avasī*). 

**(1) Mastery of adverting (*āvajjanavasī*)** 

If the first absorption can be reflected by mind-door adverting, wherever, whenever and whatever factor he likes without retardation of occurrence of adverting, this capability is called mastery of adverting. 

**PAGE 457** 

The capability of adverting (*manodvārāvajjana*) which is able to discern factors of absorption (*jhānańga*) is called mastery of adverting (*āvajjanavasī*). 

In the continuum of *meditator* who reflects *vitakka* which is a factor of first absorption previously after emerged from it the mind moments of cognitive process, shaking of life-continuum (*bhavańgacalana*), cessation of life-continuum (*bhavańgupeccheda*) and then the mind-door advertence which reflects *vitakka* appears successively. Just after that mind-door advertence which reflects *vitakka*, those reflecting impulsions 

(*paccavekkhan* *ājavana*) which also reflect that *vitakka* arise four times for the *meditator* with sharp controlling faculties while five times for the *meditator* with retarded controlling faculties very quickly. (It never occurs to seven times.) 

After those four or five times of impulsions occurred, shaking of life-continuum and cessation of life-continuum arise again. Then mind-door advertence which reflects *vicāra* arises successively. And then those reflecting impulsions which also reflect *vicāra* arise four or five times successively. After that cognitive process finished each reflecting cognitive process which reflects *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggatā* respectively, appears successively as shown previously. 

In this way, due to taking the objects of only factors of absorption continuously without taking any other objects for such time, it is capable of controlling the mind without interrupting by different objects. During reflecting impulsions are occurring, there is no extra life-continuum but essential two times only, shaking of life-continuum and cessation of life- continuum, between those cognitive process which reflect each factor of absorption. When the capability to reflect factor of absorption is so swift in this way, it can be said that mastery of adverting is fulfilled well for that *meditator*. 

The so called mastery of adverting which is reaching to excellent one with four times of reflecting impulsions separated by only two times of life-continuum can be found when the Buddha shown super-psychic knowledge called pairs of water and fire, etc. Those Noble- Ones, the most Venerable *Sāriputta* etc., except the Buddha, can also attain this kind of mastery of adverting by the time it is fulfilled with strenuous effort activity. However the duration of mastery of adverting of disciples is very short resulting in incomparable to that of mastery of adverting of the Buddha. Therefore, “those kinds of super-psychic knowledge like pairs of water and fire never concerned with disciples actually”, preached by the Buddha. There is no mastery of adverting which is swifter than that of adverting with four times of life-continuum in the world. If it is possible to reflect by those impulsions separated by a few extra times of life-continuum, it can be said that mastery of adverting. It means that the mastery of adverting can be designated as “the capability of reflecting on factors of absorption in swiftest rate”. (*Visuddhi*-1-149,150; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-178,179; Sub-commentary of *Abhidhammattha Sańgaha*-Myanmar-565,566) 

**PAGE 458** 

**(2.a) Mastery of attaining (*samāpajjanavasī*)** 

If the first absorption can be entered wherever, whenever and whatever duration he likes without retardation of occurrence of entering into absorption, this capability is called **mastery of attaining**. 

The capability of occurrence of desired impulsions of absorption as soon as the wish to enter absorption occurs without extra times of life-continuum arise, but after shaking of life-continuum, cessation of life-continuum, advertence, preliminary object, neighbourhood , successive and *gottrabhu* occurred successively, is called **mastery of attaining** (*samāpajjanavasī*). 

Well arriving into the absorption, associating with those mental concomitants *dhamma* which are identical condition of the absorption is called ***samāpajjana*** (= attaining into absorption). It means the occurrence of fulfilment  of absorption. 

Just after the wish to enter absorption occurred and then shaking of life-continuum, cessation of life-continuum, mind-door advertence arisen successively, the capability of so swiftly entering into absorption, similar to by the time the most Venerable *Moggallāna* admonished king dragon called *Nandopananda*, is called mastery of attaining. This kind of mastery is morvellous efficiency of great sharp wisdom persons for emergency of showing super-psychic knowledge, indeed. Although a few extra times of life-continuum occur resulting in inability to swift attaining as in that speed, it can be designated as **mastery of attaining** actually. (*Visuddhi*-1-149,150; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-179; Sub-commentary of *Abhidhammattha Sańgaha*-Myanmar-565,566) 

**(2.b) Efficiency of speed** 

Efficiency of speed means the capability of entering into absorption just after mind- door advertence which occurs after two times of life-continuum that follow the wish to enter absorption successively. 

This so-called mastery of attaining which is reaching to excellent one, can be found during the Buddha was preaching *Dhamma* actually. With referring to that kind of mastery, the Buddha preached as follows. — 

“*Aggivessana* … Whenever I am preaching *dhamma*, just at the end of that *dhamma* talk, I always put well my mind into *nibbāna* which is usual dwelling of me and the object of concentration of Fourth Fruit-Knowledge previously. It situates well. It makes single object. It put harmoniously. By means of that kind of keeping in mind, I always stays, really”. (*M*-1- 316) 

There is no mastery of attaining which is swifter than that of attaining of the Buddha indeed. Once upon a time, the most Venerable *Sāriputta* was entering into fourth fruition- absorption at one full-moon night in a chasm called *Kapota*. At that time one *yakkha* called *Nanda* wielded on bald pate on  

**PAGE 459** 

the most Venerable *Sāriputta* with a club which is capable of breaking down even as mountainside. Those *Mahā Thera*s who memorizes *Suttanta* said that, “As soon as emerged from the absorption, that *yakkha* called *Nanda* wielded on bald pate”. In this case, this kind of mastery of attaining of Venerable *Sāriputta* is an evidence to show as an example. 

(*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-179) 

3) **Mastery of resolve (*adhit***  ***t***   ***h***   ***ānavasī*)** 

The capability of maintaining the continuum of impulsions of absorption for as long a time as one determine to stay into the absorption, i.e., very short instant, about ten times of very short instant, one hour, one morning, one day etc., by prohibiting not to occur the current of life-continuum like a dam stop the flow of the water, is called **mastery of resolve** (***adhit***  ***t*** ***h***     ***ānavasī***). (*Visuddhi*-1-150; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-180) 

4) **Mastery of emerging (*vut***  ***t***    ***h***  ***ānavasī*)** 

The capability of leaving from the continuum of impulsions of absorption at the time one determine to emerge precisely without more or less any moment rather exact duration of entering into absorption, i.e., very short instant, about ten times of very short instant, about ten times of very short instant, one hour, one morning, one day etc. similarly is called **mastery of emerging** (***vut***  ***t*** ***h***     ***ānavasī***). 

The continuous occurrence of impulsions of absorption is called “the process of entering into the absorption”, while the occurrence of life-continuum after those impulsions of absorption already ceased if called “the process of emerging from the absorption”. In these two kinds of mastery, it should be recognized that the capability of maintaining to stay into the absorption by means of strong determination which decided to stay in the absorption throughout this duration etc., before he enters into that absorption, is designated as 

*addit* *t* *hānavasī*, while the capability of emerging from the absorption by means of strong determination which decided to emerge from the absorption fulfilled throughout this duration etc., before he enters into that absorption, is designated as *vut* *t* *hānavasī*. The story of Venerable *Buddharakkhita Thera* is good example to show apparently these two kinds of mastery. 

When he reached to eight *vassa* as a *bhikkhu*, that Venerable *Buddharakkhita Thera* who is sitting among thirty thousands *bhikkhu*s with super-psychic knowledge, created a mountain and entered into that created cave together with king dragon by handling it’s shoulder as soon as he saw garuda bird which was flying down swiftly with intention to catch that king dragon that served with rice soup for *Mahārohan* *agutta Thera*, a patient who stayed on the hill where a mango tree was grown up and the most Venerable *Mahāmahinda Thera* landed on it once upon a time. The garuda bird that flew down swiftly from the sky, fled away after the created mountain was collided with it’s breast.  

**PAGE 460** 

At that time Venerable *Mahārohan* *agutta Thera* said that “*āvuso* …! Unless *Buddharakkhita* is present, we all us would be deserving to blame, really”. (*Visuddhi*-1-150) 

By means of such consciousness of super-psychic knowledge, the mountain would be created. That consciousness of super-psychic knowledge occurs only once actually. However, in this case, it should be recognized on the fact that the capability of both maintaining and emerging from that absorption which is the fundamental necessity of super-psychic knowledge within very short instant is shown as evidence of these two kinds of mastery. Unless Venerable *Rakkhita* who had well-performed in mastery of both resolve and emerging, is present, about thirty thousands of *bhikkhu*s who had super-psychic knowledge would be deserving to blame due to lack of ability to protect from the danger of garuda bird for king dragon really. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-180) 

5) **Mastery of reflecting (*paccavekkhan***  ***a***  ***vasī*)** 

*paccavekkhan* *avasī pana āvajjanavasiyā eva vuttā*. *paccavekkhan* *ajavanāneva ni tattha āvajjanānantarānīti*. (*Visuddhi*-1-150) 

***āvajjanānantarānī**ti āvajjanavasībhāvāya yathākkamam*  *vitakkādīnam*  *jhānańgānam*  *āvajjanāya parato yāni javanāni pavattāni*, *tāni tesam*  *paccavekkhan* *āni*. *yadaggena āvajjanavasī siddhi*, *tadaggena paccavekkhan* *āvasī siddhi veditavvā*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-180) 

After mind-door advertence which reflects factors of absorption, those reflecting impulsions which also reflect factors of absorption arise successively. Capability of reflecting of impulsions on factors of absorption is called **mastery of reflecting** (***paccavekkhana***    ***vasī***). It is ability to reflect continuously without separating by many times of life-continuum between reflecting cognitive processes which reflect factors of absorption continuously , indeed. Therefore it should be recognized that if mastery of adverting (*āvajjanavasī*) is achieved, mastery of reflecting (*paccavekkhan* *avasī*) will also be achieved successively. It should be recognized on the fact that it can be divided into two types: capability of reflecting of mind-door advertence on factors of absorption is designated as mastery of adverting while that of reflecting of reflecting impulsions on factors of absorption, as mastery reflecting respectively. (*Visuddhi*-1-150; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-180) 

The most Venerable **Ledī Sayadaw** explained in his book “Great Scripture of Practice”, that “capability of arising of only four to five times of reflecting impulsions without occurring usual seven times, which reflect factors of absorption, in order to re-enter into absorption again as soon as the mastery of reflecting is finished. (**Great** **Scripture of Practice**-45) 

**PAGE 461** 

6. ***dutiyajjhānakathā* (Explanations relating with second absorption)** 

The *meditator* who had fulfilled these five kinds of mastery, after emerged from the first absorption, must perform concentration of practice of mindfulness of breathing in order to attain the second absorption by means of — 

“*ayam*  *samāpatti āsannanīvaran* *apaccatthikā*, *vitakkavicārānam*  *ol* *ārikattā ańgadubbalā*” (*Visuddhi*-1-150) 

1) reasoning that this first-absorption is quite close to the enemy called hindrances 

(*nīvaran* *a*), 

2) searching disadvantages of that first absorption, such as it has weak factors of absorption due to occurrence of gross nature of *vitakka*, *vicāra*, 
2) taking into heart the fact that the second absorption is subtler than the first one, 
2) relinquishing the attachment on the first absorption. (*Visuddhi*-1-150) 

**The enemy called hindrances (*nīvarana***    **)**— Those enemies called hindrances are removed at the neighbourhood  concentration of first absorption. By the time it is reaching to the field of neighbourhood  concentration by means of taking the object of sign of full concentration, those hindering *dhamma* would be ceased and tranquil. Owing to quite adjacent situations of the first absorption and neighbourhood  concentration of it, the former is quite adjacent to enemies called hindrances, indeed. 

***vitakka*, *vicāra*** — Owing to occurrence of the nature of *vitakka*, initial application of the mind on to sign of full concentration and that of *vicāra*, sustained application of the mind on to sign of full concentration, those natures are a kind of gross feature of mentality for a *meditator* who desires efficiency of concentration as a calm situation. It means the fact that it must be continued to develop concentration of mindfulness of breathing with intention of preferring to second absorption and unwillingness to first absorption which has weak factors of absorption due to presence of gross nature of *vitakka* and *vicāra*, by means of taking into heart the reason that “it is better for the mind of meditation to fix the object of practice without initial and sustained application of mind on that object”. 

**Toward the second absorption —** 

If he fulfils in that way, for that *meditator*, during he is reflecting on factors of absorption with the help of mindfulness and clear comprehension, after emerged from the first absorption, *vitakka* and *vicāra* arise as gross nature in such time. *Pīti*, *sukha*, and *cittekaggatā* arise as subtle nature. At that time, in the continuum of *meditator* who is taking into heart repeatedly on only that sign of full concentration in order to reject gross factors of absorption and to attain subtler factors of absorption, when it is deserving to say as the impulsion of cognitive process, that “now … the second absorption would be occurred”, by means of ceasing the flow of life-continuum, the mind-door advertence  

**PAGE 462** 

which is able to reflect sign of full concentration, arises by taking the object of that sign of full concentration continuously. Then four times of impulsions for a person with sharp controlling faculties or five times of impulsions for a person with not sharp controlling faculties, arise by taking the object of that sign of full concentration. Among those four or five impulsions, the last one called the fourth or fifth impulsions is the impulsion of second absorption of fine material sphere indeed. Those remaining three or four impulsions, except the last one are impulsions of the sensuous sphere, which are designated as *parikamma*, *upacāra*, *anuloma*, *gottrabhu* or *upacāra*, *anuloma*, *gottrabhu*, as previously mentioned in the first absorption. 

By means of these successive process of practice, this *meditator* is staying by fulfilling with the second absorption with pleasurable interest and agreeable feeling but not initial and sustained application of mind on object, which is capable of developing purification and concentration of mind due to cessation of both initial and sustained application of mind. Thus this *meditator* had well attained the second absorption, which has the object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing, which has two rejected factors of absorption so-called *vitakka*, *vicāra*, which has fulfilled three factors of absorption so-called *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*, which has three kinds of good qualities and ten characteristics, indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-150,151) 

**3.6.A. Cessation of *vitakka* *vicāra*** 

Owing to presence of perishing away just after arising of the ultimate *dhamma*, those ultimate *dhamma* occurring in the first absorption perished away within that absorption but not continuing to occur in stability up to the second absorption. Therefore all kinds of mental *dhamma* called 34 kinds of mind and mental concomitants of the first absorption, which occurred by taking the object of sign of full concentration were absent by the time that second absorption occurs actually. It is right. — Those 34 mental *dhamma*, such as *phassa* etc., occurring within the first absorption are specific ones while those 32 mental *dhamma*, such as *phassa*, etc., occurring within the second absorption are specific ones because of the occurrence of different mind moments. Although mental *dhamma* of the first absorption are obviously absent at the moment of the second absorption, in order to show clearly the fact that “owing to surpassing the gross factors of absorption, the second absorption etc., rather than the first absorption can be occurred”, the Buddha preached “***vitakka* *vicārānam***     ***vūpasamā*** = **due to cessation of *vitakka*, *vicāra***”. It should be recognized on the fact that “the Buddha did not preach as ‘due to cessation of mental *dhamma* associating with *vitakka*, *vicāra*’, actually”. (*Visuddhi*-1-151) 

**PAGE 463** 

**3.6.B. Faith and concentration** 

In the explanation of this second absorption, the Buddha emphasized on the fact that “*ajjattam*  *sampasādanam*  *cetaso ekodibhāvam*  (*M*-1-89) = significance of presence of faith which is capable of purifying mind and superior concentration in the continuum of oneself internally”. 

Here the reasonable question is that — “Is it true that the faith which is capable of purifying mind and superior concentration called *ekodi* are also present in the first absorption? Why the Buddha preached the fact that only the second absorption has the faith which is capable of proliferating concentration? etc. The answer is as follows. 

This first absorption, as the water with surfs and waves, is not well purified yet due to shaking of *vitakka* and *vicāra*. The Buddha never, therefore, preached that the first absorption is capable of purifying mind although it has faith. Owing to both the occurrence of impurity of mind and shaking of *vitakka*, *vicāra*, the concentration is not apparently developed, as a fish in sticky water, although it has balanced faith and concentration, effort and concentration. The Buddha never, therefore, preached that it is capable of proliferating superior concentration (*ekodibhāva*). 

Especially in the second absorption, the faith becomes strong due to lack of disturbances of *vitakka* and *vicāra*. Owing to attaining the help of strong and efficient faith, the concentration also becomes apparent. Therefore, it should be recognized the fact that the Buddha emphasized on significance of presence of faith, which is capable of purifying mind and superior concentration in the continuum of oneself internally, as ***sampasādanam***    ***c*** ***etaso ekodibhāvam***    f or second absorption only. (*Visuddhi*-1-152) 

***avitakka avicāra*** — Owing to capable of ceasing *vitakka* *vicāra* by abandoning the attachment on those *vitakka* and *vicāra*, this second absorption is capable of purifying the mind. It is capable of purifying the mind due to not only cessation of opacity called hindrances as in the moment of neighbourhood  concentration but also cessation of *vitakka* and *vicāra* resulting in development of concentration indeed. In this second absorption, development of concentration does not occurs due to abandoning of hindrances as in the neighbourhood  absorption and obvious occurrence of factors of absorption as in the first absorption. Thus this phrase, “***vitakkavicārānam******    ***v*** ***ūpasamā*** = due to  

**PAGE 464** 

cessation of *vitakka* *vicāra*”, was said in order to show obviously the cause of improvement of purified mind and concentration. 

Then due to cessation of *vitakka* *vicāra*, this second absorption lacks those *vitakka*, *vicāra*. It has neither *vitakka* nor *vicāra* dissimilar to either third and fourth absorption or seeing consciousness (*cakkhu viññān* *a*) which also lack those *dhamma* as a nature. Thus the reason of why *vitakka*, *vicāra* are absent in the second absorption would be shown but not merely the absence of those *dhamma*, indeed. 

However, the words, “*avitakkam*  *avicāram*  = lacking in *vitakka*, lacking in *vicāra*”, is able to show merely absence of *vitakka* *vicāra*. Therefore, after previous words, “*vicārānam*  *vūpasamā* = due to capable of ceasing *vitakka*, *vicāra*”, had be said, it is suitable to say the later words, “*avitakkam*  *avicāram*  = lacking in *vitakka*, lacking in *vicāra*”, continuously. Thus it would be said the later words, “*avitakkam* , *avicāram* ”, in order to show the quality of the second absorption actually. (*Visuddhi*-1-152,153) 

*samādhijam*  = due to presence of concentration 

It would be preached as “*samādhijam*  = due to presence of concentration”, because this second absorption occurs due to presence of both dependence condition (*upanissaya*) of the concentration of first absorption and compatibility (*sahajāta*), reciprocal (*aññamañña*), dependence (*nissaya*) conditions of associating concentration which occurs within one mind moment, together with itself (second absorption). In those two absorptions, the first and second one, the first absorption, indeed, would also be occurred by associating concentration which occurs within one mind moment together with itself (first absorption). However only the concentration of this second absorption is deserving to say “*samādhi* = concentration”. It is because the fact that — *vitakka* and *vicāra* are capable of shaking the mind by initial and sustained application. In the second absorption, however, due to lack of shakeable *vitakka*, *vicāra* and presence of purifying of mind, the concentration of this absorption is deserving to say as “*samādhi*”. Owing to deserving to say as “*samādhi*”, the Buddha preached the fact that only the second absorption is **caused by concentration** = ***samādhijam*** .    (*Visuddhi*-1-153) 

After above explanations had been read the following Pāl i Texr can be well understood easily. 

*vitakkavicārānam*  *vūpasamā ajjhattam*  *sampasādanam*  *cetaso ekodibhāvam*  *avitakkam*  *avicāram*  *samādhijam*  *pītisukham*  *dutiyam*  *jhānam*  *upasampajja viharati*. (*M*-1- 89) 

**PAGE 465** 

It would be stayed into the second absorption by fulfilled that absorption, which is capable of purifying the mind and proliferating supreme concentration due to cessation of *vitakka*, *vicāra*, which is lacking in *vitakka* *vicāra*, which is caused by the concentration of first absorption (or associating concentration within same mind moment together with itself), which has pleasurable interest called *pīti*, agreeable feeling called *sukha*. (*M*-1-89) 

**3.6.C. By the time *vitakka* *vicāra* would be rejected** 

*yathā ca pat* *hamajjhānassa upacārakkhan* *e nīvaran* *āni pahīyanti*, *na tathā imassa vitakkavicārā*. *appanākkhan* *eyeva ca panetam*  *vinā tehi uppajjati*. *tenassa te* “***pahānańga***”*nti vuccanti*. *pīti sukham*  *cittekaggatāti imesam*  *pana tin* *n* *am*  *uppattivasena tivańgasamannāgatatā veditabbā*. (*Visuddhi*-1-153) 

As those hindrances are rejected at the neighbourhood  concentration of first absorption, it is not rejected on *vitakka* *vicāra* at the neighbourhood  concentration of second absorption due to lack of both the nature of impurity and burning of *vitakka* *vicāra* and the capability of rejecting on those *vitakka* and *vicāra*. Actually by the time the impulsion of full absorption arises, this second absorption occurs without associating *vitakka* and *vicāra*. Those *vitakka* and *vicāra* can, therefore, be designated as rejected factors of that second absorption. Then it should be recognized the fact that by means of obvious occurrence of these three *dhamma*, *pīti*, *sukha*, *cittekaggatā*, the second absorption fulfils three kinds of factors. (*Visuddhi*-1-153) 

According to explanation of this commentary it should be recognized on the fact that at those impulsions of neighbourhood  absorption, i.e., *parikamma*, *upacāra*, *anuloma*, *gottrabhu*, which are called the apex of neighbourhood  concentration and belongs to cognitive process of second absorption, *vitakka* and *vicāra* are still present and associating within those mind moments. It must also be practiced on five kinds of mastery of this second absorption. It must be checked on whether *vitakka* *vicāra* are rejected or not repeatedly. It must also be much longer in entering into absorption but less in reflecting on factors of absorption at the beginning of attainment of second absorption similarly. 

**PAGE 466** 

7. ***Tatiyajjhānakathā* (Explanations relating with third absorption)** 

*evamadhigate pana tasmimpi vuttanayeneva pañcahākārehi cin* *n* *avasinā hutvā pagun* *adutiyajjhānato vut* *t* *hāya* “*ayam*  *samāpatti āsannavitakkavicārapaccatthikā*, ‘*yadeva tattha pītigatam*  *cetaso uppilāvitam* , *etenetam*  *ol* *ārikam*  *akkhāyatī*’*ti vuttāya pītiyā ol* *ārikattā ańgadubbalā*”*ti ca tattha dosam*  *disvā tatiyajjhānam*  *santato manasikaritvā dutiyajjhāne nikantim*  *pariyādāya tatiyādhigamāya yogo kātabbo*. (*Visuddhi*-1-153,154) 

The *meditator* who had fulfilled those five kinds of mastery, after emerged from the second absorption, must perform concentration of practice of mindfulness of breathing in order to attain the third absorption by means of … 

1) reasoning that this second absorption is quite close to the enemy called *vitakka*, *vicāra*, 
1) searching disadvantages of that absorption, such as it has weak factor of absorption due to occurrence of gross nature of *pīti*, with regarding to the preaching that “In that second absorption such *pīti* is present by means of obvious occurrence of waving. Due to presence of this *pīti*, it would be preached that this second absorption is gross one (*Dī*-1-34), 
1) taking into heart the fact that the third absorption is subtler than the second one, 
1) relinquishing the attachment on the second absorption. (*Visuddhi*-1-153,154) 

During it is practicing in that way in the insight of *meditator* for such time, *pīti* appears as the appearance of gross nature when factors of absorption are reflected by clear comprehension with mindfulness. Mean while *sukha* and *ekaggatā* appear as the appearance of subtle nature. At that time in the continuum of *meditator* who is practicing by taking into heart the object of that sign of full concentration only in order to reject gross factor of absorption called *pīti* and to attain the third absorption which has two factors of absorption, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*, the mind-door advertence which takes the object of sign of full concentration arises after the flow of life-continuum ceased for that process of impulsions which is deserving to say that “now the third absorption will be occurred”. Then four times of impulsions for the *meditator* with sharp controlling faculties, five times of impulsions for the *meditator* with not sharp controlling faculties arise by taking the object of that sign of full concentration. At the end of those impulsions, the fourth one or the fifth one is the impulsion of third absorption of fine material sphere. Those remaining three or four impulsions, except the last one are impulsions of sensuous sphere only as previously mentioned in the first absorption. (*Visuddhi*-1-154) 

**PAGE 467** 

**3.7.A. The person who attains the third absorption** 

(*ettāvatā ca panesa*) *pītiyā ca virāgā upekkhako ca viharati sato ca sampajāno*, *sukhañca kāyena pat* *isam* *vedeti*, *yam*  *tam*  *ariyā ācikkhanti upekkhako satimā sukhavihārīti*, *tatiyam*  *jhānam*  *upasampajja viharatīti*. (*Dī*-1-71; *Abhi*-1-45; *Visuddhi*-1-154) 

By practicing in this way this *meditator*, due to disgusting and surpassing to *pīti* and due to capable of ceasing *vitakka* and *vicāra*, stays with regardless to happiness of the third absorption. Both bodily and mentally agreeable feelings are felt by mental aggregates (*nāmakāya*) due to occurrence of fulfilling with both the mindfulness which is capable of remembering and keeping in mind the object of sign of full concentration and clear comprehension which is capable of knowing penetratively the object of sign of full concentration. Owing to cause of such third absorption, the person who attains the third absorption is praised by Noble Ones called the Buddha etc. and he is recognized as the person with strong mindfulness and happiness but neutralizes the happiness of third absorption. By fulfilling third absorption, it would be approached and stayed in that absorption. (*Dī*-1-71; *Abhi*-1-45; *Visuddhi*-1-154) 

**3.7.B. *upekkhako ca viharati*** 

In this case with regarding to the word *upekkhā*, it should be accepted the fact that it refers to *tatramajjhattatā* (equanimity)which is the nature of neglecting the happiness of third absorption and is the nature of occurrence of middle one, resulting in referring to *jhānupekkhā*. 

That *jhānupekkhā*, 

1) has the characteristic (*lakhan* *a*) as the nature of equanimity and occurrence of middle one on the happiness of third absorption. 
1) It has the function (*rasa*) of regardless to even supreme happiness of the third absorption. (It means that it had the function of opposing to inclination to supreme happiness of third absorption.) 
1) It is manifested in the insight of *meditator* as the nature of lacking of preparing to feel the bliss of third absorption, which reaches to the apex of all kinds of bliss of absorption. 

In other words — It is capable of lacking preparation of associating *dhamma* with itself to feel that supreme bliss of third absorption. 

4) It has the proximate cause (*padat* *t* *hāna*)as disgusting to *pīti*. 

Here this is reasonable question that \_\_\_ 

“Isn’t the real meaning of *jhānupekkhā*, *tatramajjhattupekkhā*? Isn’t that *tatramajjhattupekkhā* also present in first and second absorptions? Owing to presence of *tatramajjhattupekkhā* in those absorptions, it should be preached for those absorptions that “*upekkhako ca viharati* = stays with regardless to happiness of the third abs”. Why isn’t preached that *tatramajjhattupekkhā*? This is reasonable question indeed. [This question would be appeared due to presence of *tatramajjhattatā*  

**PAGE 468** 

among 34 mental *dhamma* of the first absorption, 32 mental *dhamma* of the second absorption, which are occurring by taking the object of sign of full concentration respectively. See later section ***nāmakammat***  ***t*** ***h***     ***āna***, volume 2.] 

Due to presence of unapparent function of that mental concomitant, it should not preached in that way. Due to occurrence of suppressing of *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*, the function of *tatramajjhattatā* is unapparent in those first and second absorption. In this third absorption, due to lack of suppressing of *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*, it occurs with an apparent function as the occurrence of upright head. Therefore, the Buddha preached for the third absorption only that “*upekkhako ca viharati* = stays with regardless to happiness of the third absorption”. This is the answer indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-157; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-187) 

**3.7.C. *sato ca sampajāno*** 

The nature of ability to fix on the object of sign of full concentration, the nature of ability to remember and reflect on the object of sign of full concentration is called the mindfulness (*sati*). The nature of clear comprehension to the object of sign of full concentration is called *sampajāna*. It would be preached as the person with mindfulness and clear comprehension by **subjective preaching** methodology (***puggala dit*** ***t***  ***h***     ***āna naya***). 

In those two kinds, the mindfulness — 

1) has the characteristic of remembering on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing 
1) It has the function (*rasa*) of opposing of forgetting of object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. 

In other words, it has the function of un-forgetting on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. 

3) It is manifested in the insight of *meditator* as the nature of protecting from defilements (*kilesā*). 

In other words, it can cause protection from defilements. 

In other words, it is capable of protecting not to disappear both object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing and consciousness. 

The clear comprehension — 

1) has the characteristic of thorough understanding without confusion on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. 

In other words, it has the characteristic of opposing to confusion. 

2) It has the function (*rasa*) of opposing of forgetting on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. 

In other words, it has the function of un-forgetting on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. 

3) It is manifested in the insight of *meditator* as the nature of protecting from defilements (*kilesā*). 

In other words, it can cause protection from defilements. 

In other words, it is capable of protecting not to disappear both object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing and consciousness. 

The clear comprehension — 

1) has the characteristic of thorough understanding without confusion on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. 

In other words, it has the characteristic of opposing to confusion. 

2) It has the function (*rasa*) of swimming to reach other bank (the end of way of practice of mindfulness of breathing). 

In other words, it has the function of capable swimming to reach the bank of end of function to which facing up and leading straight forward. 

3) It is manifested in the insight of *meditator* as the nature of scrutinizing on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. (*Visuddhi*-1-157) 

Among those absorptions, those mindfulness and clear comprehension is also present in two previous absorptions, the first and second absorption actually. (It means that the mindfulness and the knowledge called *sampajāna* are present in 34 or 32 kinds of mental *dhamma* of the first and second absorption respectively.) It is right. — For a person with loose mindfulness and lacking in clear  

**PAGE 469** 

comprehension, even the neighbourhood  concentration has not been fulfilled yet indeed. It is no need to say for the full absorption. However, due to occurrence of gross nature of those first and second absorptions (compared with upper absorptions), the situation of mind of those absorptions is easy as a man’s walking practice on the ground. Those functions of mindfulness and the clear comprehension are unapparent in the first and second absorptions. Actually due to rejection of factors of absorption and subtle nature of this third absorption, it is essential to the situation of mind which is kept by means of functions of mindfulness and clear comprehension for this third absorption as a man’s walking practice on the sharp edge of the sword. The Buddha, therefore preached these two words, ***sato sampajāno*** (= both fulfilment  of mindfulness which is capable of keeping object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing and wisdom which is capable of penetrative knowing object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing) in this third absorption only. It can be said further detailed as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

As if a calf is left from mother cow without protecting it, the calf approaches her again, similarly, the satisfaction of this third absorption is left from pleasurable interest (*pīti*). If that kind of satisfaction of third absorption is not well protected by mindfulness and clear comprehension, it re-approaches to the pleasurable interest again resulting in associated with *pīti*. (It means the concentration falls into the second absorption.) The next aspect is that — all beings usually desire strongly on satisfaction. This kind of satisfaction of third absorption is extremely superior one due to lack of any kind of satisfaction of mundane, which is beyond the third absorption. [It refers to the fact that the upper absorptions, such as the fourth absorption, are not associated with agreeable feeling (*sukha*) but feeling of neutrality (*upekkhā*).] 

Actually due to presence of efficiency of mindfulness and clear comprehension the *meditator* does not desire to satisfaction of this third absorption but not depending on other reasons. It should be recognized on the fact that the Buddha preached on these two words, ***sato sampajāno***, in the third absorption only in order to show clearly this significant meaning. (*Visuddhi*-1-158) 

**3.7.D. *sukhañca kāyena pat***  ***i*** ***s*** ***am***  ***v***  ***edeti*** 

The *meditator* who fulfilled with third absorption, indeed, has no intention of taking into heart (*ābhoga*) that it would be felt the satisfaction of third absorption at the moment it occurs. Although it lacks in that way, such agreeable feeling associating with mental aggregates (*nāmakāya*) are present in that *meditator* who fulfilled with the third absorption. That agreeable feeling would be felt by the *meditator* who fulfilled with third absorption. The 

next kind is that — the agreeable feeling which is associating  with such mental aggregates of third absorption, is present. Very superior corporealities produced by that agreeable feeling (= by the mind of absorption associating with that agreeable  

**PAGE 470** 

feeling), are spreading throughout body of that *meditator* who fulfilled third absorption. 

Owing to spreading throughout body with such very superior corporealities produced by mind, the *meditator* who fulfilled third absorption feels bodily agreeable feelings (*kāyika sukha*) which is caused by touching of those spreading corporealities produced by mind although he emerged from third absorption. The Buddha, therefore, preached that “***sukhañca kāyena pati***   ***s*** ***am***  ***v***  ***edeti*** = mentally and bodily agreeable feelings called the satisfaction of third absorption are felt by mental aggregates”, in order to elaborate those agreeable feelings which occur in mind called *cetasika* *sukha* and those occur in body called *kāyika* *sukha* respectively. (*Visuddhi*-1-158) 

**3.7.E. *upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī*** 

Why do those Noble Ones, such as the Buddha etc., praise the person who had fulfilled with third absorption as a person with regardless to satisfaction of third absorption; who has strong mindfulness; and who stays with full of satisfaction. Due to occurrence of deserving to praise those Noble Ones praise in this way. 

The person who has fulfilled with this third absorption is able to neutralize even satisfaction of third absorption which has the most supreme bliss and reaches to the apex of all kinds of agreeable feelings. The attachment which is able to stick on that supreme bliss of third absorption is unable to attract the *meditator*. Then the pleasurable interest (*pīti*) is unable to occur by means of such mode. Due to presence of strong mindfulness on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing by means of that mode, it is fulfilled with mindfulness. Besides, mentally agreeable feeling which is favoured  by those Noble Ones, the Buddha etc., which is deserving to feel by those Noble Ones only, which is never unpurified one, is felt by mental aggregates. Therefore it is deserving to praise indeed. It should be recognized on the fact that it would be praised as “***upekkhako satimā sukha vihārī*** 

- a person with regardless to satisfaction of third absorption, who has strong mindfulness and who stays with full of satisfaction” in order to elaborate those noble qualities which are the cause of praise for Noble Ones on the person who fulfilled with third absorption because it is deserving to praise in this way. (*Visuddhi*-1-158,159) 

This third absorption has one rejected factor called rejection of pleasurable interest (*pīti*) and has two fulfilled factors called fulfilment  of agreeable feeling (*sukha*), one- pointedness (*ekaggatā*). It should be recognized the fact that pleasurable interest would be rejected at the moment of full absorption only, but not during neighbourhood  absorption, i.e. impulsions of *parikamma*, *upacāra*, *anuloma*, *gottrabhu*, occurs. Therefore it should be recognized that those impulsions of neighbourhood  absorption are still associating with pleasurable interest. Similarly initial and sustained application (*vitakka*, *vicāra*) are also still associating with those impulsions, thus it should be recognized well. (*Visuddhi*-1-159) 

According to these explanations, it is essential important instruction in order to know 

how many  **PAGE 471** 

mind and mental concomitants are associated in each mind moment respectively during the practice of mentality is performed systematically. It must be continued to practise for attainment of five kinds of mastery of third absorption. However some *meditators* who have strong desires on pleasurable interest (*pīti*), usually fall into the second absorption frequently. Therefore it must be fulfilled to attain the third absorption by frequent reasoning on disadvantages of pleasurable interest and abandoning the attachment on it. Then it must be practiced on five kinds of mastery thoroughly. 

**PAGE 472** 

8. ***catutthajjhānakathā* (Explanations relating with the fourth absorption)** 

*evamadhigate pana tasmimp*  *i vuttanayeneva pañcahākārehi cin* *n* *avasinā hutvā pagun* *atatiyajjhānato vut* *t* *hāya* “*ayam*  *samāpatti āsannapītipaccatthikā*, ‘*yadeva tattha sukhamiti cetaso ābhogo*, *etenetam*  *ol* *ārikam*  *akkhāyatī*’*ti* *evam*  *vuttassa sukhassa ol* *ārikattā ańgadubbalā*”*ti ca tattha dosam*  *disvā catuttham*  *jhānam*  *santato manasikatvā tatiyajjhāne nikantim*  *pariyādāya cattutthādhigamāya yogo kātabbo*. (*Visuddhi*-1-159) 

After that third absorption had been fulfilled by means of these cascade of  practices successively, five kinds of mastery had also been fulfilled as mentioned above, and then emerged from third absorption and it must be endeavoured in order to attain the fourth absorption by means of reasoning two kinds of disadvantages that 

1) this third absorption has adjacent enemy called pleasurable interest (*pīti*), 
1) Due to occurrence of agreeable feeling which has gross nature, the third absorption has weak factor of absorption as preached in *Dī*-1-34, that “In that third absorption, the mode of taking into heart on such factor as agreeable feeling (*sukha*), is present, it can be said that that third absorption is gross because of presence of this agreeable feeling”, and 

reasoning advantage of fourth absorption that 

3) it is subtler in the fourth absorption (than third absorption), and then 
3) by means of abandoning strong desires to the third absorption. 

If it is fulfilled with great strenuous effort in that way, in a such time, for the *meditator* who reflects factors of absorption with mindfulness and clear comprehension after emerged from third absorption, the agreeable feeling (*sukha*) called mentally bliss (*cetasika somanassa*), appears as gross nature while both feeling of neutrality (*upekkhā*) and one- pointedness (*cittekaggatā*) appear as subtle nature. At that time, for that *meditator* who takes into heart frequently in order to reject agreeable feeling which has gross nature and to attain subtle neutrality and one-pointedness of mind, the mind-door advertence which is capable of reflecting object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing arises by taking the object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing after the flow of life- continuum is ceased in proper time. Just after that mind moment, four times of impulsions for the person with sharp controlling faculties, or five times of impulsions for the person with not sharp controlling faculties, arise successively in him. At the end of those impulsions, the fourth one for the person with sharp controlling faculties, or the fifth one for the person with not sharp controlling faculties, is the impulsion of fine material sphere (*rūpāvacara javana*). Those remaining impulsions of three or four times except the last one, are impulsions of sensuous sphere as mentioned above. (*Visuddhi*-1-159,160) 

**PAGE 473** 

The followings are significant facts indeed — 

The agreeable feeling (*sukha vedanā*) never benefit neutrality feeling (*upekkhā vedanā*) which is neither disagreeable nor agreeable feeling called *adukkhamasukha vedanā*, by means of repeated condition (*āsevana*). It must be occurred neutrality (*upekkhā*) called *adukkhamasukha* in the fourth absorption. Due to this reason, those four times of impulsions within that cognitive process of full concentration are impulsions which are associating with neutrality. Owing to both the occurrence of associating with neutrality and the occurrence of rejecting to pleasurable interest (*pīti*) previously, the pleasurable interest is wanting in the fourth absorption. This is significant notes indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-160) 

During wholesome *dhamma* benefits for wholesome *dhamma* by means of repeated condition (*āsevana*), it can perform in the process of same feeling (*vedanā*). If the preceding impulsion is neutrality, the succeeding one must also be neutrality. If the preceding impulsion is agreeable feeling (*somanassa vedanā*), the succeeding one must be agreeable feeling only. It the preceding impulsion is agreeable feeling and the succeeding one is neutrality, the preceding one is unable to benefit the succeeding one by repeated condition. Thus it is unnecessary to occur agreeable feeling of preceding impulsions due to lack of efficiency to benefit by means of repeated condition on succeeding ones. Therefore it means the fact that the neutrality feeling is associating with not only impulsion of full absorption but also impulsions of neighbourhood  concentration, adjacent to that impulsion of full absorption within same cognitive process, which are called *parikamma*, *upacāra*, *anuloma*, *gottrabhu*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-189) 

**3.8.A. The fourth absorption (*catuttha jhāna samāpatti*)** 

(*ettāvatā cesa*) *sukhassa ca pahānā dukkhassa ca pahānā pubbeva somanassadomanassānam atthańgamā adukkhamasukham*  *upekkhā satipārisuddhim*  *catuttham*  *jhānam*  *upasampajja viharatīti*. (*Dī*-1-71; *Abhi*-1-45; *Visuddhi*-1-160) 

By means of this way of practice, this *meditator*, due to rejection of both controlling faculty of bodily agreeable feeling (*sukhindare*) and that of bodily disagreeable feeling (*dukkhindare*) and due to cessation of both controlling faculty of mentally agreeable feeling (*somanassindare*), and that of mentally disagreeable feeling (*domanassindare*), reaches into the fourth absorption which is associated with neutrality called *adukkhamasukha* and thoroughly purified mindfulness by fulfilling it successively. Thus this *meditator* had well attained the fourth absorption which has object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing, which has one rejected factor of absorption so-called *sukha*, which has fulfilled two factors of absorption so-called *upekkhā*, *ekaggatā*, which has three kinds of good qualities and ten characteristics, indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-160) 

It would be ceased 

1. ***dukkhindare*** (bodily disagreeable feeling) at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the first absorption, 
1. ***domanassindare*** (mentally disagreeable feeling) at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the second absorption, 
1. ***sukhindare*** (bodily agreeable feeling) at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the third absorption, 

**PAGE 474** 

4. ***somanassindare*** (mentally agreeable feeling) at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of the fourth absorption, respectively. (*Visuddhi*-1-160) 

The reason why those cascade of cessation of four kinds of feelings among four absorptions are preached in *Uppat* *ipāt* *ika sutta*. (*Sam* -3-188-190) is as follows. — 

*atisayanirodhattā*. *atisayanirodho hi nesam*  *pat* *hamajjhānādīsu*, *na nirodhoyeva*. *nirodhoyeva pana upacārakkhan* *e*, *nātisayanirodho*. (*Visuddhi*-1-160) 

The Buddha preached on cascades of cessation of four kinds of feelings among four absorptions only due to occurrence of totally cessation. Those bodily disagreeable feeling, mentally disagreeable feeling, bodily agreeable feeling and mentally agreeable feeling called *dukkha*, *domanassa*, *sukha*, *somanassa* respectively, are ceasing extremely and obviously in the first, second, third and fourth absorption successively but not merely partial cessation. However at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration of those various absorptions it is partial cessation only but not totally indeed. 

1. It is right. — During the neighbourhood  concentration of first absorption is occurring, although bodily disagreeable feeling called *dukkhindare* is ceased temporarily, that kind of suffering can be reappeared again due to any of insect bite or unfavourable  dwelling place or unfavourable  deportment which can cause very hot. However during impulsions of full absorption are occurring continuously, bodily disagreeable feeling never appear in him. Although bodily disagreeable feeling ceases at the moment of neighbourhood  concentration, that kind of *dukkhindare* has not ceased totally yet due to lack of rejecting by opposite *dhamma* called agreeable feeling (*sukha vedanā*). 

During impulsions of full absorption arise continuously, the whole body falls into very big pit called bliss due to spreading throughout body with superior corporealities produced by mind associated with pleasurable interest (*pīti*). For the person with the whole body which is falling into the big pit of bliss, ***dukkhindare*** called bodily disagreeable feeling is ceased totally due to presence of rejecting by opposite *dhamma* called agreeable feeling (*sukha vedanā*). 

2. Then although *domanassindare* called mentally disagreeable feeling (*domanassa vedanā*) is rejected during impulsions of neighbourhood  concentration of second absorption are occurring by taking the object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing, that mentally disagreeable feeling can be reappeared again, if bodily suffering which is supported by *vitakka*, *vicāra* or  

**PAGE 475** 

mentally suffering is present in him. Unless *vitakka*, *vicāra* are wanting, it can not be occurred. 

In such consciousness, mentally disagreeable feeling (***domanassindare***) associates with it. In that consciousness, initial application (*vitakka*) and sustained application (*vicāra*) also associates with it certainly. Due to presence of those initial and sustained application, mentally disagreeable feeling would be occurred. In the field of neighbourhood  concentration of second absorption, initial and sustained application are not rejected yet. Therefore it is possible to occur that mentally disagreeable feeling in the field of neighbourhood  concentration of that second absorption. At the moment of second absorption, it is impossible to occur mentally disagreeable feeling due to finishing of rejection of those initial and sustained application which are supporting cause of mentally disagreeable feeling (*domanassindare*). 

3. Then although *sukhindare* called bodily agreeable feeling is rejected during impulsions of neighbourhood  concentration of third absorption are occurring, that bodily agreeable feeling can be reappeared again for a person with superior corporealities produced by consciousness of neighbourhood  concentration, which is associating with pleasurable interest. It is impossible to reappear that bodily agreeable feeling (***sukhindare***) at the moment of third absorption indeed. It is right. — In the third absorption, the pleasurable interest (*pīti*) which is the supporting cause of bodily agreeable feeling (*sukha*), cease totally. Therefore, 

reappearance of *sukhindare* can never be occurred indeed. [***sukhindare* means** bodily agreeable feeling which occurs associating with touching-consciousness (*kāya viññān* *a*) which is rootless wholesome result with joyful (*ahetuka kusala vipāka sukha sahagata kāyaviññān* *a*). It is also known as *kāyika sukha*.] 

4. Then although mentally agreeable feeling (*somanassa vedanā*) called ***somanassindare*** is rejected during impulsions of neighbourhood  concentration of fourth absorption are occurring, that mentally agreeable feeling can be reappeared again due to both occurrence of adjacent to that feeling and lack of efficiency to overcome totally on mentally agreeable feeling in that field of neighbourhood  concentration. However, at the moment of the fourth absorption it is impossible to occur mentally agreeable feeling (*cetasika sukha* or ***somanassindare***)actually. 

With regarding to those reasons mentioned above, when each process of cessation, viz, cessation of *dukkhindare* in the first absorption, cessation of *domanassindare* in the second absorption, cessation of *sukhindare* (*kāyika sukha*) in the third absorption and cessation of *somanassindare* in the fourth absorption, the Buddha preached as “*aparisesam*  *nirujjhati*” by using the term “*aparisesa*” which shows “totally cessation”. This is the answer indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-161) 

**3.8.B. Reasonable question** 

In this case, it is a reasonable question that — “Why did the Buddha preach commonly on those rejected feelings of various fields of neighbourhood  concentration of respective absorptions in this fourth absorption only?” It can be answered that it was preached in that way in order to be easily distinguished. 

**PAGE 476** 

The feeling of neutrality (*upekkhā vedanā*) called ***adukkhamasukha*** (= neither disagreeable nor agreeable feeling) which is preached in the Pāl i Text, is very subtle and very difficult to be understood. It is incapable of catching easily by knowledge. For this reason, it is a worldling simile that — the cowherd gathers all bulls and cows inside the farm in order to catch easily a bull that is not easy to be approached and tamed. Then after each bull is brought one by one, and when that untameable bull arrives at the entrance of farm, it can order that “this bull is untameable one that is desired to be catch, please catch it” etc. Similarly, the Buddha preached all kinds of feelings commonly in this fourth absorption in order to be distinguished easily and kept in mind by knowledge. 

This is the advantage of this kind of preaching methodology. — After those kinds of feelings are obviously shown as a common, such nature (= feeling) is neither bodily agreeable nor bodily disagreeable, it is neither mentally agreeable nor mentally disagreeable but the feeling of neutrality (*upekkhā vedanā*) called *adukkhamasukha*, indeed, with the result that it is possible to be distinguished it easily. 

On other aspect, it should be recognized on the fact that the Buddha preached those feelings commonly in this fourth absorption in order to show indirect cause of attainment of fourth absorption which is the cause of freedom of opposite nature of mind called *a-dukkha- ma-sukha* *cetovimutti*. Those factors, the first absorption which is capable of rejecting *dukkhindare* etc., are causes of that *a-dukkha-ma-sukha* *cetovimutti*. 

“*Āvuso* … *Kot* *t* *hika* … those factors of absorption of neutrality which is deliverance of the mind (***a-dukkha-ma-sukha cetovimutti samāpatti***), are of four kinds indeed. *Āvuso Kot* *t* *hika* … in this Buddha’s admonishment, due to rejection of *sukhindare*, due to rejection of *dukkhindare*, due to cessation of *somanassindare*, *domanassindare* at the moment of 

neighbourhood  absorption, the *meditator* approaches and stays into the fourth absorption by fulfilling with fourth absorption with well purified mindfulness which is caused by neutrality called *a*-*dukkha*-*ma*-*sukha*. *Āvuso* …*Kot* *t* *hika* those factors of absorption of neutrality which is deliverance of the mind are of these four kinds indeed. (*M*-1-370-*Mahāvedalla sutta*) 

According to this preaching, the neighbourhood  absorptions of those first, second, third and fourth absorptions which are capable of rejecting *dukkhindare*, *domanassindare*, sukhindare, *somanassindare*, respectively are significant factors of attainment of *a*-*dukkha*- *ma*-*sukha* *cetovimutti* *samāpatti*. It should be recognized on the fact that those four kinds of feelings are preached commonly in the fourth absorption in order to show those factors accordingly. (*Visuddhi*-1-161,162) 

In other aspect — although those *dhamma*, such as wrong view on personality (*sakkāya dit* *t* *hi*) etc. which had been eradicated by lower noble Path-Knowledges, the First- Path-Knowledge (*sotāpatti magga*) etc., in order to praise the nobility of the Third-Path- Knowledge (*anāgāmi magga*), as it would be preached in the Third Path-Knowledge that ***pañcannam******    ***o*** ***rambhāgiyānam******    ***s*** ***amy***    ***ojanānam****      

**PAGE 477** 

***parikkhayā*** = due to eradication of the five lower fetters (*samy* *ojana*), similarly, it should be recognized that those feelings are preached commonly in this fourth absorption. (*Visuddhi*-1-162) 

In other aspect — it should be recognized on the fact that those feelings, *sukha* etc. were preached in order to show the occurrence of exceedingly distance from lust (*rāga*), anger (*dosa*), delusion (*moha*) in this fourth absorption by eradicating causative *dhamma*. It is right. — Among those feelings, bodily agreeable feeling is the cause of mentally agreeable feeling and then the later is a cause of lust (*rāga*). 

Bodily disagreeable feeling is the cause of mentally disagreeable feeling and then the latter is a cause of anger (*dosa*). The fourth absorption, by means of rejecting those feelings, *sukha* etc., rejects lust and anger associating with their caused. The fourth absorption, therefore, is very far from lust and anger. This is the answer. 

*Sukhāya kho āvuso visākha vedanāya rāgānusayo anuseti*, *dukkhāya kho āvuso visākha vedanāya pat* *ighānusayo anuseti*. (*M*-1-377-*Cūl* *avedalla sutta*) 

- “Devotee *Visākha* … the underlying tendency of lust (*rāgānusaya*) always follows agreeable feeling. Devotee *Visākha* … the underlying tendency of anger (*pat* *ighānusaya*) always follows disagreeable feeling. 

Due to this reason, mentally agreeable feeling occurs as supporting factor of lust while mentally disagreeable feeling, as that of anger. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-191) 

**3.8.C. *a-dukkha-ma-sukham*****    **(** **neither-disagreeable-nor-agreeable feeling)** 

*a*-*dukkha*-*ma*-*sukha* means that due to lack of occurrence of disagreeable feeling, it is called *a-dukkha* while due to lack of occurrence of agreeable feeling, it is called *a-sukha*. With regarding to this word, rejecting those occurrences of disagreeable and agreeable ones, the third kind of feeling which is opposite of disagreeable and agreeable ones, would be shown but not merely on lack of occurrence of disagreeable and agreeable ones. The third feeling means neither disagreeable nor agreeable feeling (*a*-*dukkha*-*ma*-*sukha* *vedanā*), indeed. It is also known as neutrality feeling (*upekkhā vedanā*). 

*sāit* *t* *hānit* *t* *haviparītānubhavanulakkhan* *ā*, *majjhattarasā*, *avibhūtapaccupat* *t* *hānā*, *sukhadukkhanirodhapadat* *t* *hānā*. (*Visuddhi*-1-162) 

1. That neutrality feeling has the characteristic of the nature of feeling the object of middle one (*majjhatta āramman* *a*) which is opposite of those objects either desirable 

(*it* *t* *rāmman* *a*) and non-desirable ones (*anit* *t* *hāramman* *a*), or strongly desirable (*ati* 

*it* *t* *hāramman* *a*) and strongly non-desirable ones (*ati anit* *t* *hāramman* *a*). 

In other way — it has the characteristic of nature of feeling (on the object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing) by means of middle way which is opposite of objects of desirable and non-desirable ones. 

**PAGE 478** 

2. It has the function (*rasa*) of neutralizing on object. In other words, it has the quality of middle way. 
2. It is manifested in the insight of *meditator* as unapparent mode. [Agreeable and disagreeable feelings are apparent ones while this neutrality has unapparent feeling. As it can be reasoned that the prey climbed on the slab here and went down here after footprints were seen on both sides out of the slab, although it is invisible on the slab, this feeling of neutrality has the manifestation of unapparent one (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-191,192). 

It is the middle kind of feeling which is associating with the consciousness when agreeable and disagreeable feelings ceased. It means that if it is discerned by paralleling with apparent agreeable and disagreeable feelings, the feeling of neutrality will be apparent.] 

4. It should be recognized on the fact that it has the proximate cause (*padat* *th*  *āna*) as the field of neighbourhood  concentration of the fourth absorption in which agreeable feeling ceases. [Although it is mentioned as *sukha dukkha nirodha padat* *t* *hānā* in *Visuddhi Magga*, it is mentioned as *sukha padat* *t* *hānā* in *Mahāt* *īkā* (1-192).] 

**3.8.E. *upekkhā sati pārisuddhim*****     

The meaning of *upekkhā sati pārisuddhim*  is the nature of circumstantial purification of mindfulness which is caused by neutrality, [in this case, it is caused by equanimity (*tatramajjhattatā*) which is capable of situating on neutrality of object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing without reaching two extremities, retardation and enhancing of mind]. In this fourth absorption the mindfulness is circumstantially purified. That circumstantial purification of mindfulness if achieved by that equanimity called *tatramajjhattatā* but not by other *dhamma* indeed. Therefore the fourth absorption is designated as *upekkhā* *sati* *pārisuddhi* by commentator. In the *Vibhańga* Pāl i Text (*Abhi*-2- 272), it is explained that — 

*ayam*  *sati imāya upekkhāya visadā hoti parisuddhā pariyodātā*. *tena vuccati upekkhāsatipārisuddhi*. (*Abhi*-2-272) 

- this mindfulness is clear, circumstantially purified and circumstantially brilliant by this equanimity. It can, therefore, be said that “circumstantial purification of mindfulness caused by equanimity”, preached by the Buddha. 

Due to the presence of that equanimity, the circumstantial purification of mindfulness occurs in this fourth absorption. It should be known on that kind of *upekkhā* as the mental concomitant called *tatramajjhattatā* (equanimity) in the aspect of the ultimate sense. 

In this fourth absorption it is purified not only the mindfulness but also mind and all mental concomitants associating with the fourth absorption by that equanimity (*tatramajjhattatā*). Thus it is  

**PAGE 479** 

preached **significantly on mindfulness** (***sati sīsa***). (*Visuddhi*-1-162) 

When *pārisuddhi*  *upekkhā* (= the mental concomitant called *tatramajjhattatā*), which is thoroughly purified from all kinds of opposite *dhamma*, which lacks any kind of preparation to cease opposite *dhamma*, would be occurred, the mindfulness become both thoroughly purified and sharp as the knowledge in fourth absorption. Therefore, the commentator explained that “the circumstantial purification of that mindfulness is achieved by that *upekkhā* but not by other *dhamma*”. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-192) 

**3.8.E. The reason why it would be praised** 

Among those four kinds of absorptions, this kind of *upekkhā* (= *tatramajjhattatā*) is present in lower three absorptions. Although it is present in those absorptions, as the moonlight is not purified and not brilliant in daytime due to  

1) presence of suppression of sunshine in day-time and 
1) lack of help of darkness of night which is capable of benefiting the moon by means of occurrence of tranquillity , similarly, the moon called this *tatramajjhattupekkhā* is not purified and not brilliant in three lower absorptions due to presence of suppression of sunshine called opposite *dhamma*, such as *vitakka* etc. and lack of help of darkness of night called the feeling of neutrality (*upekkhā vedanā*). As the moonlight is unpurified in daytime, those *dhamma*, such as mindfulness etc., which are associating with that *tatramajjhutupekkhā* in one mind moment, are unpurified. Therefore any kind of absorption among those lower three ones, the first absorption etc., **would** **never be preached** as “***upekkhā* *sati* *pārisuddhim***     
- the *dhamma* with nature of circumstantial purification of mindfulness which is caused by neutrality”. 

Actually, due to both absence of suppression of opposite *dhamma*, i.e., *vitakka* etc., and presence of help of darkness of night called neutrality feeling (*upekkhā vedanā*), in this fourth absorption, the moonlight called this *tatramajjhattupekkhā* is very purified with circumstances thoroughly. Due to presence of purification of that *tatramajjhattupekkhā*, those associating *dhamma*, i.e., mindfulness etc., of it are also very purified circumstantially. Therefore, it should be recognized on the fact that it **would be preached** on the fourth absorption only as “***upekkhā* *sati* *parisuddhim***    =  the *dhamma* with nature of circumstantial purification of mindfulness which is caused by neutrality”. (*Visuddhi*-1-162,163) 

**PAGE 480** 

*tañca pana somanassam*  *ekavīthiyam*  *purimajavanesuyeva pahīyati*. (*Visuddhi*-1-163) 

“***ekavīthiya***”*nti idam*  *tattha somanassassa ekams* *ena abhāvato vuttam* , *na tato purimataresu ekams* *ena bhāvato*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-192) 

According to above explanations found in commentary and sub-commentary, it should be recognized the fact that in the field of neighbourhood  concentration of fourth absorption, especially, during impulsions of cognitive processes of neighbourhood  absorption of fourth absorption are occurring, the feeling of neutrality only associates with it but not agreeable feeling. Therefore it should be recognized that the pleasurable interest (*pīti*) never associate with the consciousness of that field of neighbourhood  concentration of fourth absorption. 

**3.8.F. Pentad method (*pañcaka naya*)** 

Above mentioned method is tetrad method (*catukka naya*) in which two factors of absorption, *vitakka*, *vicāra*, are rejected simultaneously. The Buddha preached this method for the *meditator* with sharp wisdom (*tikkha paññavā*). In pentad method, instead of four absorptions, it would be grouped into five absorptions in which *vitakka* and *vicāra* would be rejected one after another but not simultaneously. This way practice is applied for the *meditator* with little wise (*manda paññavā*). 

1. ***puggalajjhāsaya*** = Depending on inner desires of various disciples, it would be preached by two methods, *catukka* (tetrad) and *pañcaka* (pentad). 
1. ***desanāvilāsa*** = With intention to adorn preaching methodology, it would also be preached by two methods, *catukka* (tetrad) and *pañcaka* (pentad) methods. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1- 193,194) 

**In tetrad method** (*catukka* *naya*), there are four kinds of absorptions: — 

1. the first absorption with five factors of absorption, *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*, 
1. the second absorption with three factors of absorption, *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*, 
1. the third absorption with two factors of absorption, *sukha*, *ekaggata*, 
1. the fourth absorption with two factors of absorption, *upekkhā*, *ekaggatā*. 

**In pentad method** (*pañcaka* *naya*), there are five kinds of absorptions: — 

1. the first absorption with five factors of absorption, *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*, 
1. the second absorption with three factors of absorption, *vicāra*, *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*, 
1. the third absorption with two factors of absorption, *pīti*, *sukha*, *ekaggata*, 
1. the fourth absorption with two factors of absorption, *sukha*, *ekaggatā*, 
1. the fifth absorption with two factors of absorption, *upekkhā*, *ekaggatā*, respectively. 

**PAGE 481 3.9. Summary of progress to *vipassanā***  

*evam*  *nibbattacatukkapañcakajjhāno panettha bhikkhu sallakkhan* *āvivat* *t* *anāvasena kammat* *t* *hānam*  *vad* *d* *hetvā pārisuddhim*  *pattukāmo tadeva jhānam*  *pañcahākārehi vasippattam*  *pagun* *am*  *katvā nāmarūpam*  *vavatthapetvā vipassanam*  *pat* *t* *hapeti*. *katham* ? *so hi samāpattito vut* *t* *hāya assāsapassāsānam*  *samudaya karajakāyo ca cittañcāti passati*. *Yathāhi kammāragaggariyā dhamamānāya bhastañca purisassa ca tajjam*  *vāyāmam*  *pat* *icca vāto sañcarati*, *evameva kāyañca cittañca pat* *icca assāsapassāsāti*. *tato assāsapassāse ca kāyañca rūpanti cittañca tams* *ampayuttadhamme ca arūpanti vavatthapehi*. *ayamettha sańkhepo*. *vitthārato pana nāmarūpavavatthānam*  *parato āvibhavissati*. 

*evam*  *nāmarūpam*  *vavatthapetvā tassa paccayam*  *pariyesati*. *pariyesanto ca nam*  *disvā tīsupi addhāsu nāmarūpassa pavattim*  *ārabbha kańkham*  *vitarati*, *vitin* *n* *akańkho kalāpasammasanavasena tilakkhan* *am*  *āropetvā udayabbayānupassanāya pubbabhāge uppanne obhāsādayo dasa vipassanukilese* (*Visuddhi*-1-278,279) 

Thus if the meditating *bhikkhu* with tetrad absorptions (*catukka* *jhāna*), pentad absorptions (*pañcaka* *jhāna*), who had achieved into this *kāyānupassanā* *satipat* *t* *hāna*, desires to attain the noble Fruit-Knowledge called *pārisuddhi*  (circumstantial purification) by means of *vipassanā*  knowledge called *sallakkhan* *ā* and noble Path-Knowledge called *vivat* *t* *anā*, it must be fulfilled to attain five kinds of mastery of that absorption and then *vipassanā*  knowledge must be occurred by distinguishing and keeping mind mentality and corporeality. 

How it would be occurred is that — the *bhikkhu* who had attained that absorption enters into that absorption first and emerges from it and then he discerns the cause of arising (*samudaya*) of both all kinds of corporealities i.e., four great elements and 24 derived corporealities, which are produced by four causes, i.e. *kamma*, mind, temperature, nutriment, which are called *karajakāya*; mind (= consciousness and mental concomitants); and those corporeal *dhamma* called in-breath and out-breath (*assāsa passāsa*). 

**[***kiñcāpi assāsapassāsa cittasamut* *t* *hānā*, *karajakāyam*  *pana vinā tesam*  *appavattanato* “***kāyañca cittañca pat*** ***i***  ***c*** ***ca assāsapassāsā***”*ti* *vuttam* . (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-337) 

- The in-breath and out-breath  are a group of corporeal units produced by mind in which the sound as ninth factor, called *cittaja* *navaka* *kalāpa*. Those corporeal *dhamma* consisting in the in-breath and out-breath are corporealities produced by mind (*citta* *samut* *t* *hāna* *rūpa*) actually. However, due to inability to occur those corporeal *dhamma* of in-breath and out- breath in the absence of underived and derived corporealities called *karajakāya*, the commentator explained that “***kāyañca cittañca***  

**PAGE 482** 

***pat***  ***i*** ***c*** ***ca assāsa passāsa***” = “corporeal *dhamma* of in-breath and out-breath occur depending upon both *karajakāya* and mind”. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-337)**]** 

It would be illustrated that — as if the blower is applied to move upward and downward, the air is pumped out depending upon both the blower and appropriate effort of the man which is suitable to occur that air, similarly, it should be recognized on the fact that those in-breath and out-breath occur depending upon both *karajakāya* and mind. After that it would be distinguished as 

1. the corporeality on both 
1) all corporeal *dhamma* consisting in in-breath and out-breath and 
2) un-derived and derived corporealities called *karajakāya*, 
2. the mentality on both 
1) the consciousness (*citta*) and 
1) mental concomitants which are associating *dhamma* of that consciousness.  

This is summary of this explanation relating with in-breath and out-breath (*ānāpānassati kathā*). Detailed account on distinguishing of mentality and corporeality would be presented later. 

After mentality and corporeality are distinguished and kept in mind in this way, those causal *dhamma*, such as ignorance (*avijjā*), craving (*tahn* *ā*), *kamma* etc., of those mentality and corporeality, must be scrutinized. If the *meditator* who scrutinizes causal *dhamma*, ignorance etc., knows and sees those causal *dhamma* penetratively, he is able to overcome 16 kinds of skeptical doubts, such as …, “Did I occur in previous life?” etc., which occurs depending upon occurrence of mentality and corporeality for three periods, past, future and present lives. 

The *meditator* who had well overcome those skeptical doubts, then, discerned on five aggregates, i.e., corporeality, feeling, perception, *kamma*-formation, consciousness, which are occurring in 11 modes, past, future, present, internal, external, etc., by means of *kalāpa sammasana naya* through which those *dhamma* were generalized as impermanence (*anicca*) etc. commonly; then he had rejected ten kinds of impurities of *vipassanā*  knowledge (*dasa upakkilesa*), light (*obhāsa*) etc., which usually occur before *udayabbayānupassanāñān* *a*, which belongs to the stage of purification of way of practice leading to the Path-Knowledge (*pat* *ipadāñān* *adassana visuddhi*); then he reached to knowledge of dissolution (*bhańgānupassanāñān* *a*) which is capable of discerning on perishing stage of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, after arising of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* which were kept in mind by *udayabbaya* *ñān* *a*, had been given up; he disgusted and freed from attachment of all kinds of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* by means of *bhańgānupassanāñān* *a*; then it would be reached to four Noble Path- Knowledges successively and it would be situated into the fourth-Fruit-Knowledge resulting in reaching to the end of 19 kinds of reflecting knowledge (*paccavekkhan* *a ñān* *a*); the arahant who is the most supreme one deserving to accept offerings of all beings including heavenly 

beings, occurred successively indeed. 

By following the way of practice mentioned in this way, the way of practice of mindfulness of breathing of that *bhikkhu* who practiced the mindfulness of breathing from the beginning of counting method called *gan* *anā naya* to the end of *vipassanā*  practice had been put through thoroughly. 

**PAGE 483** 

These words mentioned above are related to explanation of the first tetrad instructions (*pathama catukka*) (among four tetrads instructions) of mindfulness of breathing by means of all cascade of modes, indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-278,279) 

**3.9.A. Special notes** 

With regarding to these explanations found in above commentary, it will be continued to present, 

1) how to distinguish and keep in mind corporeal *dhamma* which are called the body of in- breath and out-breath (*assāsa passāsa kāya*) and all kinds of corporealities occurring throughout body (*karajakāya*), in the section of ***rūpa* *kammat*** ***t***  ***h***     ***āna*** (= practice on the corporeality), 
2) how to distinguish and keep in mind mental *dhamma* (= consciousness and mental concomitants), in the section of ***nāma kammat*** ***t***  ***h***     ***āna*** (= practice on the mentality), 
2) how to distinguish and keep in mind the mode of occurrence or resultant five aggregates depending upon obvious occurrence of causal *dhamma*, ignorance, craving, clinging, *kamma*- formation, *kamma* etc., within three periods, past, future and present, in the section of 

***pat***  ***i*** ***c*** ***casamuppāda*** (Dependence-Origination), 

4) how to distinguish and keep in mind the nature of those *sańkhāra* *dhamma* called corporeality, mentality, causes, results, by means of characteristics (*lakkhan* *a*),function (*rasa*), manifestation (*paccupat* *t* *hāna*) and proximate cause (*padat* *t* *hāna*), in the section of ***lakkhanā***    ***dicatukka*** (= tetrad modes, characteristics; etc.), 
4) how to develop *vipassanā*  practice on those *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, in the section of ***vipassanā*** , respectively. 

Now, it would be continued to present remaining three kinds of tetrad instructions (*catukka*). There is no specific way of practice among those three tetrad instructions. It is because the fact that it would be preached for the *meditator* who had attained absorptions by means of practice of the first tetrad instructions called ***kāyānupassanā***, on 

1. the second tetrad instructions by means of ***vedanānupassanā*** (repeated discerning on feeling), 
1. the third tetrad instructions by means of ***cittānupassanā*** (repeated discerning on consciousness), 
1. the fourth instructions by means of ***dhammānupassanā*** (repeated discerning on *dhamma*), 

respectively. 

**3.9.B. Second tetrad instructions (*dutiya catukka*)** 

1. *pītipat* *isam* *vedī assasissāmīti sikkhati*, *pītipat* *isam* *vedī passasissāmīti sikkhati*.** 
1. *sukhapat* *isam* *vedī*. *pa*.** 
1. *cittasańkhārapat* *isam* *vedī*. *pa*. 
1. passambhayam  cittasańkhāram . pa. (page-483, Volume I) 

**1.  *pīti pat*** ***i***  ***s*** ***amvedī*** 

1. It should be practiced by knowing the pleasurable interest (*pīti*) apparently in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath. 

It should be practiced by knowing the pleasurable interest (*pīti*) apparently in order to fulfil the occurrence of out-breath. 

**PAGE 484** 

*pītipat* *isam* *vedīti pītim*  *pat* *isam* *viditam*  *karonto pākat* *am*  *karonto assasissāmi passasissāmīti sikkhati*. *tattha dvīhākārehi pītipat* *isam* *viditā hoti āramman* *ato ca asammohato ca*. 

*katham*  *āramman* *ato pīti pat* *isam* *viditā hoti*? *sappītike dve jhāne samāpajjati*. *tassa samāpattikkhan* *e jhānapat* *ilābhena āramman* *ato pīti pat* *isam* *viditā hoti*, *āramman* *assa* 

*pat* *isam* *viditattā*. *katham*  *asammohato*? *sappītike jhāne samāpajjitvā vut* *t* *hāya jhānasampayuttam*  *pītim*  *khayato vayato sammasati*. *tassa vipassanākkhan* *e* 

*lakkhan* *apat* *ivedhena asammohato pīt* *i pat* *isam* *viditā hoti*.*  (*Visuddhi*-1-279) 

The meaning of ***pīti* *pat***  ***i*** ***s*** ***amvedī*** is that — it would be practiced by knowing the pleasurable interest (*pīti*) thoroughly as a ruby in the hand, in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. In that word, *pīti* *pat* *isamvedī*, the pleasurable interest would be known thoroughly by means of both 

1) the nature of object (*āramman* *a*) and 
1) the nature of non-delusion (*asammoha*). 
1) How the pleasurable interest would be known by means of the **nature of object**? 

As shown in tetrad method of absorptions, two kinds of absorptions, the first absorption and the second absorption, which are associating with pleasurable interest (*pīti*), would be entered one by one. By the time the absorption to be entering, that *meditator* is deserving to know factor of absorption called pleasurable interest which belongs to the first or second absorption which has object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing due to presence of attainment of absorption and due to taking object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. This is because the fact that object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing is deserving to be known thoroughly indeed. (*Visuddhi*-1-279) 

The meaning is as follows: — For instance, if the man who searches the snake knows apparently dwelling site of that snake, it is deserving to know apparently on that snake with the result that it had been trapped. It is because the fact that catching of that snake can be achieved easily by means of reciting *mantra*. Similarly, if object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing which is dependence of pleasurable interest, is known apparently, it is deserving to know apparently on that pleasurable interest. It is because the fact that it is very easy to distinguish both the specific character object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing of pleasurable interest, (i.e. the characteristic of nature of satisfying to see object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing) and the general character (*sāmañña lakkhan* *ā*) of pleasurable interest i.e. mode of nature of impermanence, suffering and non-self. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-338) 

In this case due to the nature of satisfying and pleasing on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing is pleasurable interest, if object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness  

**PAGE 485** 

of breathing is known apparently, the pleasurable interest will be appeared apparently depending upon the life continuum which occurs depending upon the physical base of mind (*hadaya vatthu*). In the Pāl i Text, commentary and sub-commentary of *Anupada sutta*, it is explained that if discerning on both base and object is put through simultaneously, the mental *dhamma* will be appeared clearly in the insight of *meditator*. (Detailed explanation can be seen in section V, Volume II, *Nāma kammat* *t* *hāna*.) 

2) How the pleasurable interest would be known apparently by means of the **nature of non- delusion**? 

As shown in tetrad method of absorptions, two kinds of absorptions, the first absorption and the second absorption, which are associating with pleasurable interest (*pīti*), would be entered one by one and it would be emerged from it and then that pleasurable interest which is yoking with absorption would be discerned as the nature of dissolution and perishing away. By the time the pleasurable interest is discerned by and seen by *vipassanā*  knowledge, the *meditator* penetratively know and see both specific character and general character of pleasurable interest (= associating mental *dhamma* including *pīti* as significant object). That penetrative knowing and seeing on specific and general characters of pleasurable interest is called “it would be known by means of the nature of non-delusion (*asammoha*). Thus the pleasurable interest would be known apparently by means of the nature of non-delusion. (*Visuddhi*-1-279) 

*yatheva hi āramman* *amukhena pīti pat* *isam* *viditā hoti*, *evam*  *tams* *ampayuttadhammāpi āramman* *amukkhena pat* *isamviditā eva hontīti*. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-339) 

As the pleasurable interest would be known apparently by leading to face with object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing, similarly, it should be recognized the fact that mind and mental concomitants which are associating *dhamma* with pleasurable interest in the same mind moment, would be known apparently by leading to face with object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-339) 

2. ***sukha pat*** ***i***  ***s*** ***amvedī*** 
2. ***citta* *sańkhāra* *pat*** ***i***  ***s*** ***amvedī*** 

It should be recognized on the meaning of remaining words, ***sukha* *pat***  ***i*** ***s*** ***amvedī***, ***citta* *sańkhāra* *pat***  ***i*** ***s*** ***amvedī***, as shown in this way. (It refers to two kinds of knowing by means of both the **nature of object and non-delusion**.) Significant notes are as follows: — 

It should be recognized on the fact that agreeable feeling (*sukha*) would be known apparently by means of the first, second, and third absorption for tetrad absorption method, while two kinds of *citta* *sańkhāra*, the feeling (*vedanā*) and the perception (*saññā*) would be known apparently by means of four kinds of absorption. Two *dhamma* called feeling and perception are designated as ***citta* *sańkhāra***. 

With relating to the phrase, *sukha* *pat* *isamvedī*, it should be recognized the fact in *Pat* *isambhidā* *magga* Pāl i Text, that “***sukhanti dve sukhāni kāyikañca sukham***    ***c*** ***etasikañca*** 

- it would be preached on two kinds of agreeable feeling as both bodily agreeable feeling (*kāyika sukha*) and mentally agreeable feeling (*cetasika sukha*), in order to show the fields of *vipassanā*  knowledge (*vipassanā*  *bhūmi*) which are occurred by means of three kinds of generalization on five aggregates, corporeality, mentality, and *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, occurring in 31 realms, which are occurred by 11  

**PAGE 486** 

modes of situations, such as , past, future, present, internal, external etc. called miscellaneous *sańkhāra* (*pakin* *n* *aka* *sańkhāra*). This is because the fact that it is impossible to occur bodily agreeable feeling in the absorption. (It means that during the absorption is occurring, mentally agreeable feeling only can be occurred within mind moment of impulsion of absorption but not bodily agreeable feeling. Bodily agreeable feeling can be occurred by associating with touching-consciousness which is joyful, rootless wholesome resultant (*a- hetuka* *kusala* *vipāka* *sukha*-*sahagata* *kāyaviññān* *a* *citta*) but not with consciousness of impulsions of absorption.) (*Visuddhi*-1-280; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-340) 

4. ***passambhayam******    ***c*** ***itta sańkhāram*****     

***Passambhayam******    ***c*** ***itta sańkhāram***  means that it should be practiced by ceasing the feeling and perception which is called gross *citta* *sańkhāra* in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. It should be recognized on the cessation, which is intended to be said indirect way as “by ceasing”, as mentioned in detailed on *kāya* *sańkhāra*. 

***vedanānupassanā* (= repeated discerning on feeling)** 

It can be explained in detail. For this second tetrad instructions, in the word 

“*pat* *isamvedī* = by knowing apparently on pleasurable interest”, it would be preached emphatically on associating feeling which occurs together with pleasurable interest with regarding to pleasurable interest (*pīti*) significantly. 

In the word “***sukha* *pat***  ***i*** ***s*** ***amvedī*** = by knowing apparently on agreeable feeling”, it would be preached on agreeable feeling as a sample only. In the phrases, “*citta* *sańkhāra* *pat* *isamvedī*, *passambhayam*  *citta* *sańkhāram* ”, it would be preached emphatically on only the feeling which associates with perception due to presence of the preaching that “***saññā* *ca*** 

***vedanā* *ca* *cetasikā* *ete* *dhammā* *citta* *pat*** ***i***  ***b***  ***haddhā* *citta* *sańkhāra*** = these two kinds of *dhamma* called perception and feeling, occur depending upon consciousness. Those are prepared by consciousness (*Pat* *isambhidā Magga*-187; *M*-1-376) 

[Owing to the Buddha preached in *Pat* *iccasamuppāda*, that “***viññānp***    ***accayā nāmarūpam***  = because presence of consciousness, corporeality and mentality occur” etc. resulting in occurrence of mental concomitants is also due to presence of consciousness, it means the fact that those two *dhamma* called the feeling and perception, occur depending upon and relating to the consciousness indeed.] 

It should be recognized the fact that the Buddha preached this second tetrad instructions by means of ***vedanānupassanā*** in this way. (*Visuddhi*-1-280; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-341) 

**PAGE 487** 

**3.9.C. Third tetrad instructions (*tatiya* *catukka*)** 

1. *cittapats* *am* *vedī assasissāmīti sikkhati*, *cittapats* *am* *vedī passasissāmīti sikkhati*. 
1. *abhippamodayam*  *cittam* . *pa*. 
1. *samādaham*  *cittam* . *pa*. 
1. *vimocayam*  *cittam* . *pa*. 
1. ***citta* *pat*** ***i***  ***s*** ***am***  ***v***  ***edī*** 

It would be practised by knowing apparently on the consciousness in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath. 

It would be practised by knowing apparently on the consciousness in order to fulfil the occurrence of out-breath. 

It should be recognized the fact that the consciousness should be known apparently by means of four absorptions respectively in this third tetrad instructions. It also refers to two kinds of penetrative knowing, viz, the **nature of object** and the **nature of non-delusion**. It would be entered into four absorptions one by one, by taking object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. In the continuum of that *meditator*, due to fulfilment  of absorption and taking object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing, it should be known apparently on the consciousness which is associating with the absorption and has the object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. It is because the fact that it should be known apparently on object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing. This is how the consciousness of absorption would be known by means of the nature of object. 

Four absorptions would be entered one by one. After it would be from absorption, the consciousness of absorption (including mental concomitants associating with absorption) would be generalized as three general characters by seeing the nature of dissolution and perishing away. During it is carrying out *vipassanā*  practice, the *meditator* penetratively knows and sees both specific character and general character of consciousness of absorption. That kind of penetrative knowing can be said that the consciousness of absorption would be known apparently by means of non-delusion. (*Visuddhi*-1-280; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-341) 

In the first instruction of the third tetrad, the Buddha instructed to breathe in and out by knowing apparently on the nature of object and non-delusion. 

2. ***abhippamodayam******    ***c*** ***ittam******     

It means that — it should be practiced 

1) by enhancing the consciousness of absorption with the help of pleasurable interest which is associating with absorption, 
2) by pleasing the consciousness of absorption which occurs by taking the object of the nature of dissolution and perishing away of pleasurable interest (*pīti*) of absorption, with the help of pleasurable interest which is the object of *vipassanā*  knowledge in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. 

**PAGE 488** 

The bliss and great satisfaction would be occurred by means of: 

1) mode of concentration, 
1) mode of *vipassanā* . 
1) **By means of mode of concentration** is that — it would be entered into the first and second absorptions which are associating with pleasurable interest. At the moment of absorption, that *meditator* enhances and pleases consciousness of absorption with the help of pleasurable interest which is associating with absorption. 
1) **By means of mode of *vipassanā*** is that — after the first and second absorption 

were entered one by one and then emerged from it and it would be discerned by *vipassanā*  knowledge on the nature of dissolution and perishing away of pleasurable interest which is associating with each absorption. If it is discerned in this way, by the time *vipassanā*  knowledge are occurring, that pleasurable interest pleases and satisfies the *vipassanā* knowledge which is occurred by taking the object of pleasurable interest. The *meditator* who practices in this way, can be said the person who fulfils in order to occur in-breath and out- breath by pleasing and satisfying the consciousness well. (*Visuddhi*-1-280,281). It should be recognized as a person is very pleasing and satisfying when he see his very beloved friend. 

3. ***samādaham******    ***c*** ***ittam*****     

The meaning of “*samādaham*  *cittam*  = it should be practiced by putting the mind well in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath”, is that — it should be practiced by putting and leading the mind on to the object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing with the help of entering into four kinds of absorption, the first absorption etc., in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. (*Visuddhi*-1-281) 

It means that — it must be practiced by putting the mind into the absorption for the purpose of stability of the mind on the object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing after the concentration has been reached up to the apex without shaking the mind but balanced five controlling faculties with the result that the mind of meditation never approach to any kind of extremity, i.e., retardation of the mind to take the object called ***līnapakkha*** and wandering of the mind from the object called ***uddhacca pakkha***, not inclination toward the object of meditation and enhancing of the mind which can cause restlessness of the mind in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. 

(*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-342) 

If the breathing is performed by occurring and entering into the absorption, it can be said that the mind is putting well and breathing in the *samatha* stage. In the *vipassanā*  stage, it must be as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

For the *meditator* who enters into four kinds of absorptions one by one and emerges from it and discerns the consciousness of the absorption as the nature of dissolution and perishing away, a kind 

**PAGE 489** 

of concentration, **momentary one-pointedness** of the mind called *khan* *ika cittekaggatā* occurs by means of penetrative knowing and seeing the general characters called *anicca* (impermanence), *dukkha* (suffering), *anatta* (non-self) of those consciousnesses of absorption 

of every mind moment during the *vipassanā*  knowledge are occurring. It can be said the *bhikkhu* who puts his mind on the object called the nature of impermanence, of suffering , of non-self of the consciousness of absorption, as “it would be practiced by putting the mind well in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath”. (*Visuddhi*-1-281) 

***khan*** ***i***  ***k***  ***a cittekaggatā*** — means the concentration which is capable of putting the mind on object momentarily. If that *khan* *ikā* *samādhi* (momentary concentration) called *khan* *ikā* *cittekaggatā* occurs continuously by means of taking the objects of 

1. **mode of impermanence**, the nature of dissolution just after arising, 
1. **mode of suffering**, the nature of being oppressed by continuous process of arising and passing away, 
1. **mode of non-self**, the nature of lack of self (*atta*) which is the indestructible essence, of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, the consciousness of *vipassanā*  is firmly fixed to those *sańkhāra* *dhamma* due to lack of suppressing of opposite *dhamma*, such as delusion (*moha*) etc. The commentator, therefore, explained above words accordingly. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-342) 

It is essential to be noticed the fact this kind of *khan* *ikā* *samādhi* can be occurred only in the continuum of *meditator* who attained absorption and is able to carry out *vipassanā*  practice on *sańkhāra* *dhamma* of absorption. (Those remaining kinds of *khan* *ikā* *samādhi* are presented in previous section.) This is the Buddha’s instruction how to put the mind well on the object and breathe in and out systematically. 

4. ***vimocayam******    ***c*** ***ittam******     

It would be practiced by means of delivering from opposite *dhamma* for a long time (***vikkhambhana vimutti***), i.e., 

1. from hindering *dhamma* (***nīvaran***  ***a***  ) by the first absorption, 
1. from initial and sustained application (***vitakka***, ***vicāra***) by the second absorption, 
1. from pleasurable interest (***pīti***) by the third absorption, 
1. from agreeable and disagreeable feelings (***sukha***, ***dukkha***) by the fourth absorption, in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. (*Visuddhi*-1-281) 

This is the way of breathing with the help of delivering from opposite *dhamma* by concentration. The way of practice by means of *vipassanā*  is as follows: — 

**PAGE 490** 

It would be entered into those four absorptions one by one and emerged from it. Then discerning  on  three  general  characteristics  should  be  performed  by  seeing  the  nature  of dissolution and perishing away of the consciousness which is associating with the absorption. ( the consciousness and mental concomitants) 

At the moment of occurrence of *vipassanā*  knowledge, that *meditator* who is discerning by taking the object of perishing away or dissolution (*bhańga*) of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* which are led by the consciousness of absorption, causes the in-breath and out- breath by delivering the mind … 

1) from perception of permanence (***nicca saññā***) by *aniccā* *nupassanā* 
1) from perception of happiness (***sukha* *saññā***) by *dukkhā* *nupassanā* 
1) from perception of self (***atta saññā***) by *anattā* *nupassanā* 
1) from strong desire to *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, ***nandī*** called *sappītika tahn* *ā* by *nibbidā* *nupassanā* 
1) from lust (***rāga***) by *virāgā nupassanā* which discerns the nature of dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* 
6) from lust (***samudaya*** = *rāga*) by *nirodhā* *nupassanā* which discerns the nature of cessation of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, 
6) from obsession on **permanence** of *sańkhāra* by *pat* *inissaggā* *nupassanā* which discerns the perishing away of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* and leading to the *nibbāna* by means of mode of momentary rejecting on *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, respectively. 

The Buddha, therefore, preached that “it would be practiced by delivering the mind from opposite *dhamma* in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath”. Thus, it should be recognized on the fact that “this third tetrad instructions would be preached by means of ***cittā* *nupassanā*** (repeated discerning on consciousness)”. (*Visuddhi*-1-281) 

**The fact to be noticed** 

Although it would be preached on the second tetrad by means of *vedanā* *nupassanā*, while the third tetrad by means of *cittā* *nupassanā*, it must not discern only either one feeling (*vedanā*) uniquely or one consciousness (*citta*) uniquely. It must be discerned on both associating mental concomitants, physical bases and those mental *dhamma* which are occurred by taking the object of those corporeal *dhamma* respectively. It can be seen detail in *nāma* *kammat* *t* *hāna*, Volume II. 

**3.9.D. Fourth tetrad instructions (*catuttha* *catukka*)** 

1. *aniccānupassī assasissāmīti sikkhati*. *aniccānupassī passasissāmīti sikkhati*. 
1. *virāgānupassī*. *pa*. 
1. *nirodhānupassī*. *pa*. 
1. *pat* *inissaggānupassī*. *pa.* 

**PAGE 491** 

**1. *aniccā nupassī*** 

It should be practised by repeated discerning as *anicca* (impermanence) in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. 

In this case, the commentator instructed to distinguish among four terms, 

1. *anicca* (impermanence) 
1. *aniccatā* (mode of impermanence) 
1. *aniccā nupassanā* (repeated discerning as impermanence) 
1. *aniccā nupassī* (the person who had fulfilled with *aniccā* *nupassanā* knowledge). *tattha aniccanti pañcakkhandhā*. *kasmā*? *uppādavayaññattabhāvā*. *aniccatāti* 

*tesamy* *eva uppādavayaññathattam* , *hutvā abhāvo vā*. *nibbattānam*  *tenevākārena at* *t* *hatvā khan* *abhańgane bhedoti attho*. *Aniccānupassanāti tassā aniccatāya vasena rūpādīsu aniccanti anupassanā*. *aniccānupassīti tāya anupassanāya samannāgato*. *tasmā evam*  *bhūto assasanto passasanto ca idha* “*aniccānupassī assasissāmi passasissāmīti sikkhatī*”*ti veditabbo*. (*Visuddhi*-1-281,282) 

*tattha sańkhatadhammānam*  *hetupaccayehi uppajjanam*  *ahutvā sambhavo attalābho uppādo*. *uppannānam*  *tesam*  *khan* *anirodho vināso vayo*. *jarāya aññathābhāvo aññathattam* . *yathā hi uppādāvatthāya bhinnāya bhańgāvatthāyam*  *vatthubhedo natthi*, *evam**  

*t* *hitisańkhātāya bhańgābhimukhāvatthāyampi vatthubhedo natthi*, *yattha jarāvohāro*. *tasmā ekassāpi dhammassa jarā yujjati*, *yā khan* *ikajarāti vuccati*. *ekams* *ena ca uppādabhańgāvatthāsu vatthuno abhedo icchitabbo*, *aññathā* “*añño uppajjati*, *añño bhijjatī*”*ti āpajjeyya*. *tayimam*  *khan* *ikajaram*  *sandhāyāha* “*aññathatta*”*nti*.*  (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1- 343,344) 

1. ***anicca* (impermanence)** 

*Anicca* means those five aggregates (*pañcakkhandha*) indeed. Why is it called *anicca*? Owing to presence of occurrence of 

1) the nature of arising (*uppāda*) 
1) the nature of perishing away (*bhańga*) 
1) the nature of static instant which is special mode that bending toward perishing instant just after arising, 

it is called *anicca* (**impermanence**). (It means that due to presence of three obvious *sańkhāra* *lakkhan* *ā* called arising (*uppāda*) perishing away (*vaya*) and static phase (*aññathatta*), it is designated as *anicca*.) 

2. ***aniccatā*** 

*Aniccatā* means the special mode of occurrence of arising and passing away, static phase which is bending toward the perishing phase, of those five aggregates only. In other words, it means that the momentary perishing away (*khan* *a* *bhańga*) of those ultimate sense of five aggregates without situating as it’s arising phase is called *aniccatā*. 

3. ***aniccā* *nupassanā*** 

It means that repeated discerning on those five aggregates, such as corporeality, etc., as *anicca* (impermanence) by means of *aniccatā* through which the momentary perishing away of ultimate  

**PAGE 492** 

*dhamma* is seen by *vipassanā*  insight, is called *aniccānupassanā*. In other words, the *vipassanā*  knowledge which repeatedly discerns as *anicca* is designated as *aniccānupassanā*. 

4. ***aniccānupassī*** 

The *meditator* who had fulfilled with that *aniccānupassanā* knowledge is called *aniccā* *nupassī*. Therefore, it should be recognized the fact that the person who fulfils the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath by repeated discerning on those five aggregates as *anicca* can be said the person who is practicing by repeated discerning as *anicca* in this fourth tetrad instructions. (*Visuddhi*-1-281,282) 

**3.9.E. *uppāda*-*vaya*-*aññathattā*** 

***uppāda***: — Those corporeal and mental *dhamma* called *sańkhāra* *dhamma* which are occurred by unity of various adaptations of respective causes, are called *sańkhāra* *dhamma*. The sudden occurrence of newly one without it is present previously, the attaining of the nature of ultimate *dhamma* due to presence of 

1) direct cause called *hetu* or *janaka* which is capable of arising those corporeality and mentality directly, and 
1) supporting cause called *upatthambhaka* or *paccaya* which is capable of supporting to occur those corporeality and mentality, is called the **arising** (***uppāda***). 

***vaya***: — The cessation of those occurred *sańkhāra* *dhamma* as the momentary dissolution (*khan* *a* *bhańga*), is called **perishing away** (***vaya***). 

***aññathatta***: — The occurrence of ultimate *dhamma* with special mode called static phase (*t* *hiti*), which is bending toward perishing phase just after arising, is called ***aññathatta***. 

***sańkhata***: — The Buddha preached in *Sańkhata* *lakkhan* *ā sutta, Ańguttara Tikanipāta* (*Ańg*-1-150) that there are three characteristics of *sańkhata*, viz, the arising, static, perishing away, in all kinds of ultimate *dhamma*. The arising *dhamma*, then, perishes away. It is not the fact that the arising *dhamma* is the specific one while the perishing and static *dhamma* is another kind actually. It will be clear understood as follows: — 

As it is no difference between the arising phase of one kind of ultimate *dhamma* and the perishing phase of another kind of ultimate *dhamma* [it means that by the time the earth element occurs, it is impossible to occur the perishing away of the water-element or by the time the contact (*phassa*) occurs, it is impossible to occur the perishing away of feeling (*vedanā*)], similarly by the time it is bending toward perishing phase, called the static phase occurs, there is no difference between ultimate *dhamma*. That moment bending toward perishing phase can be designated as *jarā* (decaying). Therefore it is suitable to designate as ***jarā*** of one ultimate *dhamma* uniquely. That kind of *jarā* can be designated as momentary decaying (*khan* *ika jarā*). It is right. — It is essential to non-difference between the arising and perishing phase of essence of ultimate *dhamma*, actually. If one accepts difference between them except non-different, a kind of misunderstanding that “another kind of ultimate *dhamma* arises while another kind of ultimate *dhamma* perishes away”, can be occurred in those person who prefers difference between them. Therefore it should be recognized on the 

fact  **PAGE 493** 

that with regarding to that *jarā*, it is intended to say momentary decaying (***khan*** ***i***  ***k***  ***a jarā***) only, but not refer to old aging (***jarā***) which is applied in conventional truth (*vohāra sacca*), i.e., *pabandha* *t* *hiti* *paññatti* *jarā* = the nature of old aging of being in the aspect of conventional truth. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-343,344) 

Due to presence of such three characteristics called arising – static – perishing away, the designation of five aggregates as *anicca* (impermanence) would be occurred. The term *anicca* is designated on those three characteristics with the result that after it would be said that “***aniccatā* *ti* *tesamy***    ***eva uppāda vayaññathattam***  = *aniccatā* means the arising, perishing away and static phase called *jarā* of those five aggregates only, especially, in order to show the term *aniccatā* refers to momentary cessation (*khan* *ikā nirodha*), the commentator said that ‘***huttvā abhāvo vā***’ = the nature voidness after arising is also called *aniccatā*”. In that phrase, due to previous occurrence of the nature of arising before the nature of voidness, it would be said in addition to “*huttvā* = after arising”. With regarding to the word, *huttvā* = after arising, it would be clearly shown the fact that previous voidness occurs before the voidness (*a-bhāva*) called perishing away occurs. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-344) 

The meaning is that — the voidness (*a-bhāva*) are of two kinds: ***pāgabhāva*** which is a kind of voidances of corporeality and mentality before arising phase (*uppāda*) and ***viddhams***    ***ābhāva*** which is also another kind of voidances of corporeality and mentality after perishing phase. In the words, “*huttvā a-bhāvo vā*”, ***a-bhāvo*** refers to the meaning of ***viddhams***    ***ābhāva*** which is the nature of voidances of corporeality and mentality after perishing phase called ***vināsa a-bhāva***. Then, owing to presence of the meaning, “corporeality and mentality arise from voidness called *a-bhāva* before it arise”, of the word, ***huttvā***, that word shows the fact that “the voidness of corporeality and mentality before arise (*a-bhāva*) is preceding one while “the voidness of corporeality and mentality after perishing phase” is succeeding one. 

Corporeality and mentality are void before it arise and after perished away. Thus these are the nature of *dhamma* which is occurring temporarily as the arising phase, (*uppāda*), static phase(*t* *hiti*), perishing phase (*bhańga*), between two kinds of voidness. Those five kinds of aggregates are only impermanent *dhamma* (*anicca*), and the *meditator* who wants to discern repeatedly as *anicca*, must 

1. know five aggregates which are ultimate realities occurring in three periods, two continuums, 
1. know causal *dhamma* occurring in three periods of those five aggregates, as they really are, 
1. know  
   1) mode of dissolution after arising 
   1) modes of perishing away in every moment called *anicca* of five aggregates associating with causal *dhamma*, 
1. practise by seeing mode of impermanence and by generalizing as *anicca*, in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. 

If it would be practiced in that way it can be said that *aniccānupassanā* knowledge had been fulfilled  

**PAGE 494** 

thoroughly. The *meditator* with that *aniccānupassanā* knowledge can be designated as the person of *aniccā* *nupassī*, indeed. 

2. ***virāgānupassī*** 

*virāgānupassīti ettha pana dve virāgā khayavirāgo ca accantavirāgo ca*. *tattha khavirāgoti sańkhārānam*  *khan* *abhańgo*. *accantavirāgoti nibbānam* . *virāgānupassanāti tadubhayadassanavasena pavattā vipassanā ca maggo*. *tāya duvidhāyapi anupassanāya samannāgato hutvā assasanto passasanto ca* “*virāgānupassī assasissāmi passasissāmīti sikkhatī*”*ti veditabbo*. *nirodhānupassīpadepi eseva nayo*. (*Visuddhi*-1-282) 

In the word, ***virāgā nupassī***, there are two kinds of *virāga*, viz, 

1) ***khaya* *virāga*** which is dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* 
1) ***accanta virāga*** which is cessation of lust (*rāga*) or *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, and it is called *nibbāna*. 

In those two kinds, the momentary dissolution (*khan* *a bhańga*) where momentary cessation (*khan* *a nirodha*) of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* occurs continuously, is called *khaya* *virāga*. *Nibbāna* called *asańkhata* where all kinds of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* are totally ceased, is called ***accanta* *virāga***. 

The *vipassanā*  knowledge which is occurred by means of discerning only on dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* is designated as ***virāgā* *nupassanā***. The noble Path- Knowledge which is occurred by means of seeing on *nibbāna* called *accanta* *virāga*, is also known as *virāga* *nupassanā*. It should be recognized on the fact that the person who fulfils the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath by completion with those two kinds of *virāga* *nupassanā* knowledge, practices as “*virāga* *nupassī* *assasissāmi* *passasissāmīti* *sikkhati*”. 

In other words: — The *vipassanā*  knowledge, due to capability to discern as three general characters by taking the object of momentary dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, occurs continuously by means of ***khaya* *virāgā* *nupassanā***. Due to bending toward the eternal peace, *nibbāna* called *asańkhata*, the *vipassanā*  knowledge occurs by means of ***accanta* *virāgā* *nupassanā*** simultaneously. 

The noble Path-Knowledge is penetratively knowing and seeing the eternal peace, *nibbāna*, called *asańkhata* where all kinds of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* are totally ceased, with the help of non-delusion (*a-sammoha*). That noble Path-Knowledge which is taking the object of *nibbāna*, eradicates deluding *dhamma* which covers *sańkhāra* *dhamma* and prohibits dissolution of those *dhamma*, without any remain. Due to eradication of delusion which is incapable of knowing the dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, the knowledge (*vijjā*) which is knowing it, had been fulfilled as it’s function (*kicca siddhi*). That kind of knowing by means 

of it’s function, can be designated as knowing with non-delusion (*a-sammoha*). Due to eradication of delusion (*moha*), if dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* are discerned again, it will be known every time indeed. That kind of knowing can be designated as *khaya* *virāgā* *nupassanā* which always discerning on dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* by means of non- delusion. 

**PAGE 495** 

Therefore, the noble Path-Knowledge would be occurred by means of *khaya* *virāgā* *nupassanā* which discerns dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* by means of non-delusion. It should be recognized on the fact that owing to ability of discerning on *nibbāna* called *asańkhata* where all kinds of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* are totally ceased, where lust (*rāga*) are totally ceased, by means of facing with the object directly, the noble Path-Knowledge occurs by means of *accanta* *virāgā* *nupassanā*, actually. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-334) 

3. ***nirodhā* *nupassī*** 

Similarly, it should be recognized on the word, *nirodhā* *nupassī* in which two kinds of cessation includes: dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* called ***khaya* *nirodha*** and the eternal peace, *nibbāna* which is *asańkhata* *dhātu*, called ***accanta* *nirodha***. It means that it should be practiced by repeated discerning on dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* and by taking the object of *nibbāna* where those *sańkhāra* *dhamma* and lust are ceased in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath. 

4. ***pat***  ***i*** ***n***  ***issaggā* *nupassī*** 

In the word, *pat* *inissaggā* *nupassī*, there are two kinds of abandoning (*pat* *inissaggā*); 

1) ***pariccāga* *pat***  ***i*** ***n***  ***issaggā*** 
1) ***pakkhandana* *pat***  ***i*** ***n***  ***issaggā***. 

Those *vipassanā*  knowledge and noble Path-Knowledge which are capable of abandoning defilements, are called *pat* *inissaggā* *nupassanā*. 

***vipassanā*** — *Aniccānupassanā* knowledge which is repeated discerning as *anicca* by taking the object of dissolution of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, abandons wrong perception called perception of permanence (*nicca saññā*) which falls on *sańkhāra* *dhamma* by means of temporary abandoning (*tadańga* *pahāna*). Those defilements which are led by ignorance, craving and clinging, called *kilesa* *vat* *t* *a*, those wholesome and unwholesome actions (*kusala*, *akusala* *kamma*) called *sańkhāra* which are caused by that *kilesa* *vat* *t* *a*, which are capable of forming new existence, such resultant aggregates (*vipāka* *khandha*) which are caused by that *kilesa* *vat* *t* *a* and *kamma* *vat* *t* *a* called *abhi* *sańkhāra*, can be occurred in future by means of obsession as permanence (*nicca*). If the mode of discerning as impermanence (*anicca*) on dissolution process of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* occurs continuously, it abandons all kinds of those *kilesa* *vat* *t* *a*, *kamma* *vat* *t* *a* and resultant aggregates called *vipāka* *vat* *t* *a* by means of **non- reoccurrable again in future**. 

Those *kilesa* *vat* *t* *a*, *kamma* *vat* *t* *a* resultant aggregates called *vipāka* *vat* *t* *a*, which are caused by perception of happiness (*sukha* *saññā*) and perception of self (*atta* *saññā*), are abandoned by means of temporarily and non-reoccurrable again in future during *vipassanā*  practice through which *dukkha* *nupassanā* knowledge which takes the object of nature of being oppressed by continuous dissolution and perishing away of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, abandons the perception of happiness, while  

**PAGE 496** 

*anattā* *nupassanā* knowledge which takes the object of nature of lack of “self” which is non- destructible essence in those perishing *sańkhāra* *dhamma* abandons the perception of self (*atta* *saññā*), occurs continuously in him. Then, due to knowing and seeing faults of *sańkhāra* *dhamma* really, i.e., the fault of impermanence, the fault of suffering, the fault of non-self, the fault of loathsomeness (*asubha*) of all *sańkhāra* *dhamma* called *sańkhata*, which are situated in three worlds, viz, sensuous world, fine-material world and immaterial world, it usually be occurred as entering into eternal peace, *nibbāna* called *a-sańkhata* *dhātu* by means of bending toward and inclination to that *nibbāna* which is opposite *dhamma* of *sańkhāra* *dhamma*. 

The *vipassanā*  knowledge can, therefore, be designated as *pariccāga* *pat* *inissaggā*, due to ability to abandon defilements together with resultant aggregates, *abhi* *sańkhāra* *dhamma* temporarily. Due to occurrence of entering into *nibbāna* by bending toward it, it is also designated as *pakkhandana* *pat* *inissaggā*. 

If those defilements would be abandoned by eradication (*samuccheda*) without any remain, the noble Path-Knowledge not only abandons both wholesome, unwholesome actions called *abhi* *sańkhāra*, which are capable of forming new existence, and the resultant aggregates which are caused by those defilements and *abhi* *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, by means of making a condition which is incapable of reoccurrable in future again, but also enters into eternal peace, *nibbāna* called *a-sańkhata* *dhātu*, by means of facing with *nibbāna* as it’s object. That noble Path-Knowledge can, therefore, be designated as both ***pariccāga*** 

***pat***  ***i*** ***n***  ***issaggā*** = the *dhamma* which is able to abandon permanently defilements with aggregates, *abhi* *sańkhāra* *dhamma*, and ***pakkhandana* *pat*** ***i***  ***n***  ***issaggā*** = the *dhamma* which is able to enter into eternal peace, *nibbāna* called *a-sańkhata* *dhātu* by taking as it’s object. Those two kinds of knowledge: *vipassanā*  knowledge and noble Path-Knowledge would be designated as *anupassanā* due to ability to follow preceding knowledge and take the object of preceding knowledge and due to ability to discern repeatedly on those preceding knowledge successively. 

The meaning is that — the *vipassanā*  knowledge repeated discerns as *anicca*, *dukkha*, *anatta* by taking the object of preceding *vipassanā*  knowledge, which are always arising and passing away so-called mode of impermanence (*anicca*) etc. Then the succeeding *vipassanā*  knowledge repeatedly discerns as *anicca*, *dukkha*, *anatta* by taking the object of arising and passing away processes of preceding *vipassanā*  knowledge. Therefore it would be said *anupassanā*. The noble Path-Knowledge, indeed, would also be designated as *anupassanā*, due to ability to follow *gottrabhu* and discern *nibbāna* which is the object of *gottrabhu*. It should be recognized on the fact that the person who completed with those two kinds of knowledge: *vipassanā*  knowledge and noble Path-Knowledge in order to fulfil the occurrence of in-breath and out-breath, can be said that he practised  

**PAGE 497** 

as “*pat* *inissaggā* *nupassī* *assasissāmīti* *sikkhati*, *pat* *inissaggā* *nupassī* *passasissāmīti* *sikkhati*”. (*Visuddhi*-1-282; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-345) 

This is the instruction of the Buddha in order to fulfil occurrence of in-breath and out- breath by arising *vipassanā* knowledge and Path-Knowledge successively. 

**3.9.F. Four kinds of *anupassanā*** 

*ayam*  *tāvettha kāyānupassanāvasena vuttassa pat* *hamacatukkassa* 

*anupubbapadavan* *n* *anā*. 

*yasmā panettha idameva catukkam*  *ādikammikassa kammat* *t* *hānavasena vuttam* . *itarāni pana tīn* *i catukkāni ettha pattajjhānassa vedanācittadhammānupassanāvasena vuttāni*. (*Visuddhi*-1-269) 

*idam*  *catutthacatukkam*  *suddhavipassanāvaseneva vuttam* . *purimāni pana tīn* *i samathavipassanāvasena*. *evam*  *catunnam*  *catukkānam*  *vasena sol* *asavatthukāya ānāpānassatiyā bhāvanā veditabbā*. *evam*  *sol* *asa vatthuvasena ca pana ayam*  *ānāpānassati mahapphalā hoti mahānisams* *ā*. (*Visuddhi*-1-282) 

According to above explanations found in *Visuddhi Magga*, the Buddha expounded 

1. the first tetrad instruction by means of ***kāyānupassanā***, 
1. the second tetrad instruction by means of ***vedanānupassanā*** 
1. the third tetrad instruction by means of ***cittānupassanā*** 
1. the fourth tetrad instruction by means of ***dhammānupassanā***, respectively. 

Among those tetrad instructions, it had been instructed to discern the second, third and fourth tetrad instruction by means of *vedanānupassanā*, *cittānupassanā*, and *dhammānupassanā* respectively, for only those persons who had well attained absorptions (*jhāna* *lābhī*). 

In the preaching of the Buddha in that way, this fourth tetrad (*catuttha* *catukka*) would be preached by means of pure *vipassanā* (*suddha* *vipassanā*). In those tetrads, the first, second and third ones, it would be expounded by means of both *samatha* and *vipassanā*, commonly. Thus it should be recognized on the practice of mindfulness of breathing which has 16 modes of depending bases by means of four kinds of tetrad instructions. This way of practice so-called the mindfulness of breathing, which has thoroughly developed by means of these 16 modes of depending bases, has great advancement and improvement up to the Fourth Fruit-Knowledge (*arahatta* *phala* *ñān* *a*) indeed. 

**PAGE 498 3.10 Five advantages of concentration** 

1. ***dit***  ***t***   ***h***   ***adhamma sukha vihāra nisams***    ***a*** 

Those noble arahants who had eradicated all cankers (*āsava*), due to presence of intention to stay peacefully for the whole day in the absorption, are able to occur and develop the concentration of full absorption. The concentration of full absorption of those noble arahants has the advantage called ***dit***  ***t***   ***h***   ***a* *dhamma* *sukha* *vihārā* *nisams***    ***ā*** = staying with partial happiness in recent physical and mental situations, actually. The Buddha, therefore, preached that — 

“*Cunda* … actually, these *jhānic* *dhamma* which are capable of concentrating the mind on one-pointedness of the object of sign of *samatha*, which are developed by those hermits out of the Buddha’s admonishment, can not be said the practices which are capable of rejecting and eradicating defilements. In the admonishment of me (the Buddha) who is real Noble-One, those *jhānic* *dhamma* can be said only *dhamma* which are capable of staying with partial happiness in recent physical and mental situations, actually” etc. (*M*-1-49) preached by the B. (*Visuddhi*-1-368) 

Those arahants had been achieved to perform the function of Path-Knowledges and Fruit- Knowledges which are deserving to perform under the Buddha’s admonishment. There is no function to do anymore in order to attain the Path-Knowledge. Therefore trying to attain absorptions  and  entering  into  those  absorptions  performed  by  those  noble  arahants  has advantages to stay with total happiness in recent physical and mental situations only. This is the first advantage of the concentration. 

2. ***vipassanā* *nisams***    ***ā*** 

The concentration of full absorption of fulfilling noble ones (*sekkha*) and worldlings (*puthujana*), which is developed by intention with the purpose of *vipassanā* practice, is advantage to occur *vipassanā*, due to occurrence of proximate cause of *vipassanā* knowledge. 

The neighbourhood  concentration which is developed by following the proper way of practice under the opportunity to encounter with the arising of the Supreme Buddha, which is suitable to attain the invaluable results called the Path-Knowledge, Fruit-Knowledge and *nibbāna* along with the rounds of rebirth which is unpurified by those defilements, such as the craving (*tahn* *ā*) etc., has also the advantages to occur *vipassanā*. 

“The duration when the Buddha is appearing” called *buddhuppāda* *navama* *khan* *a* is the most difficult opportunity in the world. Due to occurrence of the most difficult opportunity of ***buddhuppāda* *navama* *khan***  ***a***  , it refers to the neighbourhood  concentration of a *meditator* who fulfils *vipassanā* practice in order to overcome the suffering of rounds of rebirth without delaying to attain  

**PAGE 499** 

the concentration of full absorption but with great fears of knowledge, actually. Therefore the Buddha preached that — 

“*samādhim*  *bhikkhave* *bhāvetha* *samāhito* *bhikkhave* *bhikkhu* *yathābhutam*  *pajānati*”. (*Sam* -2-12; *Sam* -3-363) = “*Bhikkhu*s … it should be occurred concentration; it should be developed concentration; *bhikkhu*s … the *bhikkhu* with the mind that is associating with concentration which is well put on the object (sign of full concentration etc.), distinguishes thoroughly (four Noble Truths)” etc. (*Visuddhi*-1-368; *Mahāt* *īkā*-1-459,460) 

3. ***abhiññā* *nisams***    ***ā*** 

Such noble persons, indeed, fulfil various kinds of absorptions with intention to attain super-psychic-knowledge, such as, creating many people from single one just after emerging from the fourth absorption which is the basic factor of super-psychic-knowledge (*abhiññān* *a*). If those persons have significant wholesome deeds which were the cause of attainment of the super-psychic-knowledge in previous lives, the concentration of full absorption has advantage of super-psychic-knowledge, due to occurrence of proximate cause of super- psychic-knowledge of the fourth absorption or eight kinds of absorptions (*at* *t* *hasamāpatti*) which would be entered. Therefore, the Buddha preached that — 

*so yassa yassa abhiññāsacchikaran* *īyassa dhammassa cittam*  *abhininnāmeti abhiññāsacchikiriyāya*, *tatra tatreva sakkhibhabbatam*  *pāpun* *āti sati sati āyatane*. (*M*-3-138) 

- “that person leads and bends toward the mind with strong determination in order to face with such such *dhamma*, such as creating of various kinds, which is well developed by means of super-psychic-knowledge. If the significant wholesome deeds called *adhikāra* which were the causes of attainment of super-psychic-knowledge in previous lives, are present apparently, it would be reached into a situation which is deserving to face with that that *dhamma* which can be faced by means of super-psychic-knowledge,” in *M*-1-138. (*Visuddhi*-

1-368) 

4. ***bhava* *visesā* *nisams***    ***ā*** 

If such persons never fall the absorption with desires to attain the existence of brahma or worldling persons never fall the absorption without desire to attain the existence of brahma, the concentration  

**PAGE 500** 

of full absorption has advantage to attain special existence called brahma world (*bhava* *visesā* *nisams* *ā*), due to capability to attain special existence called brahma world for those persons with desires to attain the existence of brahma and for those persons who never fall absorption although they have no desires to attain that kind of existence. Therefore, the Buddha preached that — 

*pat* *hamam*  *jhānam*  *parittam*  *bhāvetvā kattha upapajjanti*. *brahmapārisajjānam*  *devānam*  *sahabyatam*  *upapajjanti*. (*Abhi*-2-439) 

“Which realm would be reached as rebirth for him because it would be developed the first absorption with less efficiency? It would be reached into fellowship of brahma called *brahma* *pārisajjā*,” in *Abhi*-2-439. (*Visuddhi*-1-369) 

***apatthayamānā vā*** — The commentator said the words, *appatthayamānā* *vā* = “although they have no wishes”, in order to show the fact that although it never been wished any existence depending on any kind of *kamma* which are causes of reaching to various existences, the function of wish to existence (***bhava* *patthanā***) had been achieved due to occurrence of fulfilment  of that *kamma* which are causes of reaching to various existences, indeed”. (*Mahāt* *īkā*-1-460) 

The meaning is that — although none of wishes for any existence which is corresponding with *kamma* during that *kamma* which is the cause to reaching various existences has being performed, unless those defilements with underlying tendency (***anusaya* *kilesā***), which are deposited in the continuum of corporeality and mentality of himself, are totally eradicated by the noble Path-Knowledge, presence of those underlying tendency (*anusaya*) is significant cause of occurrence of birth consciousness (*kamma* *viññān* *a*). Every *kamma* developed in the continuum of any person with underlying tendency, has efficiency to occur resultant *dhamma* whenever opportunity would be occurred. Therefore, those *kamma* which are causes of reaching to various existences, play the significant role in reaching those existences by means of fulfilment  of those *kamma* but not depending on whither wishing to attain any existence has been performed or not. Although there was no wish to attain any life during that *kamma* had been developed, for a person with underlying tendency (*anusaya*), the sign of future existence would be appeared at the time of near death impulsions, due to presence of efficiency of that *kamma*. At that time, the occurrence of continuum of mind which is bending toward any existence that is correspondence of his or her previous *kamma*, is the fixed natural law for every being. The occurrence of inclination toward any kind of existence is due to presence of efficiency of underlying tendency which had been deposited in continuum of corporeality and mentality during that *kamma* had being performed. (See *Cetanā* *Sutta*, *Nidāna* *Vagga* *Samy* *utta*.) 

Not only the concentration of full absorption is capable of performing to occur new existence in that way but also the neighbourhood  concentration is capable of performing good existences of sensual sphere (*kāma* *sugati*), i.e., existences of human being and heavenly beings of 6 kinds. (*Visuddhi*-1-369) 

**PAGE 501** 
PAGE43
