***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa"*** 

***NIBBĀNA*** GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**THE CONCENTRATION SHOULOD BE DEVELOPED** 

**VOLUME I Page 601 – 650** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU*** 

**Edited By** 

**Venerble Ashin Sajjana (*dvipiṭakadhara*)** 

**First Edition** 

Copyright (c)  2007 ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** 

This book belongs to the Public Domain and may be reproduced without any further permission from the author and translator. 
**PAGE-601** 

17. **Develop concentration through emphasizing on the specific character** 

In  this  stage,  concentration  must  be  developed  by  emphasizing  on  the  specific character of each element. 

1. **The earth-element** 

It is designated as “softness” for the less degree of hardness while hardness, for the higher degree of hardness. It is designated as “smoothness” for the less degree of roughness while  “roughness”,  for the higher degree of  roughness.  If the hardness  and roughness is apparent, the heaviness becomes apparent. It is designates as “lightness” for the less degree of “heaviness”,  while  the  “heaviness”  for  the  higher  degree  of  heaviness.  The  nature  of hardness, roughness and heaviness are significant for the earth-element. Among these, the nature of hardness is the most significant one. If it is apparent, the roughness and heaviness become apparent indeed. 

2. **The water-element** 

When cement is mixed with little amount of water, it becomes cluster resulting higher degree of cohesion occurs. When a little amount of cement is mixed with large amount of water, it becomes flowing. Then degree of flowing becomes higher. Therefore less degree of flowing is called or designated as “cohesion” while higher degree of flowing; as “flowing”. The nature of flowing, therefore, is significant for the water-element. 

3. **The fire-element** 

A few degree of temperature id designated  as “coldness”, while higher degree of temperature, “heat”. The nature of heat, therefore, is significant for the fire-element. 

4. **The air-element** 

When an old house which is nearly collapsed, is supported by buttress, that house becomes stable. The nature of supporting is ability to maintain not to collapse by pushing on to the outside of a wall. Ability to move something is called “pushing”. 

Ability to maintain a such thing in it’s original situation is designated as “supporting, while ability to move, as “pushing”. Thus the nature of supporting is the specific character of air-element, while that of  “pushing”, the specific function of it. Every ultimate ***dhamma*** usually possesses both the specific function and the specific function as fixed natural law. Thus, if the nature of supporting is emphasized and discerned. It can be known on the nature of pushing simultaneously.  

Therefore,  during  developing  concentration by  taking  the  object  of  the  four  great elements, it must be emphasized on 

1. the nature of hardness roughness of the earth-element, 
1. the nature of flowing of the water-element, 
1. the nature of heat of the fire-element, 
1. the nature of supporting of the air-element, respectively. It must discern frequently by taking the object of the nature of each element, and take into to heart as the earth- element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element. 

**PAGE-602** 

The mind of meditation must be fixed on the objects of the four great elements. One must try to  balance  among  five  controlling  faculties,  seven  factors  of  enlightenment,  between  the effort and the concentration. Thus, if these are equal, the mind of meditation becomes stable on the objects of the four great elements. It must be carried out with strong resolution that may the mind of meditation be fixed on the object one hour, two hours etc…. When the concentration become higher, the whole body becomes disappears and the bulk of the four great  elements  can  be  seen  by  direct  knowledge.  At  that  time,  it  must  be  developed concentration continuously by taking the objects of the four great elements in order to attain sufficient concentration. 

18. **The neighbourhood absorption (*āupacarajhana*)** 

***Pāli Quotation (Visuddhi-1-347) (Mahāṭī-1-435)*** 

The meaning of above commentary and sub-commentary are as follows. 

- The effort which is trying to know the specific character of the four great elements 

as it really is, the effort which is trying to situate mind of meditation fixed on the object of the four great elements and the concentration which is stability of the mind of concentration on the  object  of  the  nature  of  the  four  great  elements,  occur  in  the  mind  of  meditation, simultaneously. 

At such time, in the mind of meditation of a ***bhikkhu*** who takes to heart the object of the specific character of the four great element after adjusted both kinds of the effort and concentration equally, has equal situations of five faculties, i.e.,  

1. the  faculty  of  faith  (***saddhindare***),  which  is  strongly  belief  on  the  training  of concentration, which is the process of developing concentration by taking the objects of  the  four  great  elements  and  on  the  training  of  wisdom,  which  is  knowing penetratively the specific character of each element, 
1. the faculty of effort which is trying to know the specific character of the four great elements and endeavour to situate mind of meditation fixed on the object of the four great elements, 
1. the faculty of mindfulness which is keeping in mind only the specific characters of the four great elements, repeatedly and continuously, 

**PAGE-603** 

4. the faculty of concentration which is stability of the mind, fixed on the object of the specific characters of four great elements, 
4. the  faculty  of  wisdom  which  is  penetrative  knowing  and  seeing  each  specific character of the four great elements by analytical knowledge. 

These five kinds of controlling faculties become balanced and clear. At that time, due to far from opposite ***dhamma***, i.e., unbelief, laziness, unawareness, wandering, ignorance which is unable to know the specific characters of the four great elements as it really is, it is supported by very powerful seven factors of enlightenment, i.e., 

1. ***satisambojjhańga*** = the factor of mindfulness which is keeping in mind the specific characters of the four great elements repeatedly and continuously, 
1. ***dhammavicaysambojjhańga***  =  the  factor  of  wisdom  which  is  scrutinizing  and knowing penetratively each specific character of the four great elements, 
1. ***vīriyasambojjhańga*** = the factor of effort which is trying to know and concentrate the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***pītisambojjhańga*** = the factor of bliss which is complete happiness of the mind of meditation to take the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***passaddhisambojjhańga*** = the factor of tranquility which is calm and peaceful mind of meditation on the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***samādhisambojjhańga*** = the factor of concentration which is stability of the mind in order to fix on the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***upekkhāsambojjhańga***  =  the  factor  of  neutrality  which  is  able  to  equal  mind  of meditation neither to be enthusiastic nor fall back to take the object of the specific characters of the four great elements and five factors of absorptions (***jhāna ańga***), i.e., 
1. ***vitakka*** = initial application which is the nature of full attention of the mind towards the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***vicāra*** = sustained application which is the nature of repeated realizing on the object of specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***pīti*** = pleasurable interest which is the nature of bliss to feel the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***sukha*** = mentally agreeable which is the nature of delight to feel the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***ekaggatā*** = one-pointedness of the mind which is fixed together with only one object of the specific characters of the four great elements, become very sharp and apparent in the insight of ***meditator***. 

**PAGE-604** 

The following five kinds of hindrances, 

1. ***kāmicchandanīvaraņa***  =  the  hindrance  of  sensual  pleasure  which  desires  sensual object of various kinds, 
1. ***byapadanīvaraņa*** = the hindrance of ill will which is destroyable anger on the objects of beings and ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma***, 
1. ***ṭhina-middha*** = the hindrances of sloth and torpor which are drowsiness of mind and mental concomitants, 
1. ***uddhacca, kukkucca*** ***nīvaraņa*** = hindrances of restlessness and repentance which are wandering  and  regret  about both  misdeeds  which  had been  done  and  right  deeds which had not been done yet, 
1. ***vicikicchāanīvaraņa*** = the hindrance of sceptical doubt which is scepticism about both  training  of  concentration  which  is  called  the  neighbourhood  concentration through the objects of the specific characters of the four great elements and training of wisdom which is penetrative knowing and seeing on the specific characters of the four great elements, are opposite ***dhamma*** of five kinds of factors of absorption and those five hindrances are able to prohibit the mind of meditation not to follow the way of practice. When factors of absorption are very sharp and apparent, because these are opposite ***dhamma*** of five hindrances, they are able to remove the latter associating with  unwholesome  ***dhamma***  simultaneously.  Thus  ***meditator***  attains  well  the neighbourhood concentration through the object of the specific characters of the four great elements. 

In the commentary called ***Visuddhimagga-1-347***, it is instructed that if should be discerned only on the nature of element, as the earth-element, the water-element, the fire- element, the air-element but not beings, living self etc….. It should be 

1. kept in mind well, and 
1. taken to heart the specific characters of elements frequently, 
1. scrutinized each specific character of elements repeatedly by eye of wisdom. 

It  explained that “thus in the continuum of  meditating ***bhikkhu*** who practices by means of way of practice mentioned above, the peak concentration of sensual world, which is unable to reach to full concentration, due to very profound nature of the ultimate ***dhamma***, has  been  occurred  by  the  wisdom  which  is  able  to  distinguish  various  kinds  of  specific characters of elements, like the shining candle light.” This is the meaning of above quotations found in commentary and sub-commentary. 

**PAGE-605** 

19. **Further explanation again** 

Those ***meditators*** who understood how to reach neighbourhood concentration through meditation on the four great elements, may be present depending upon above explanation only. However, some ***meditators*** who are unable to understand well, may also be present. It would be presented repeated explanation again for those kinds of ***meditators***. 

It must be discerned by adjusting between the faith and knowledge, the effort and concentration with the help of strong mindfulness when the specific character of four great elements had been scrutinized throughout body generally. 

Especially if either the faith is not strong on the way of practice of the four great element or it will become criticize by the time the concentration must be developed, the faith and wisdom are still powerless indeed. It is essential to fulfill powerful faith on the way of practice of the four great elements. Very strong wisdom also plays vital important role in the four great-elements meditation in order to see each specific character of four great elements correctly. If either both the faith and the wisdom are weak or the wisdom is predominant but the faith is weak, it is very far to reach the field of neighbourhood concentration, indeed. 

Then it is also essential to be balanced between the effort and concentration. Two kinds of effort, physical effort and mental effort, which are strenuous practice to fulfill the concentration  situating  on  each  specific  character  of  the  four  great  elements,  are  very important  because  the  mind  of  meditation  becomes  fall  back  when  both  kinds  of  effort diminish. On the other hand, if the effort becomes over, the mind of meditation wanders without fixing on the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, resulting the concentration can not be developed. 

Sometimes, with decrease effort but relaxation of the mind, it is stable on the object of specific characters of the four great elements. It is better for mind of meditation knowing each specific character of the four great elements and it becomes stable. But if it is stable without  knowing  the  specific  characters  of  the  four  great  elements,  the  factors  of enlightenment, tranquility, concentration, neutrality, become over in the mind of meditation. At that time, it must be developed wisdom factor, effort factor, bliss factor and endeavoured to see specific characters of the four great elements with the help of mindfulness factor of enlightenment. As mentioned above, ***Adhicitta Sutta, Anuttarasītibhava Sutta, Bojjhanga*** ***Sutta***, one applied to balance five controlling factors, seven factors of enlightenment. 

**PAGE-606** 

Sometimes, the mind of meditation wanders from here to there, without situating on the object of the four great elements, due to predominance of effort etc., at that time, it should be developed the factors of tranquility, concentration, neutrality, but not wisdom, effort, bliss. 

Sometimes, either due to weakness of wisdom which is able to see each specific character  of  the  four  great  elements  or  due  to  lack  of  tranquility  of  mind  and  mental concomitant  called  ***upasamasukha***,  the  mind  of  meditation  becomes  void  of  pleasurable interest to practice. At that time, it should be recognized on eight kinds of great fearful bases, (***samvega  vutthu***),  and  it  should  be  developed  faith  by  practicing  on  recollection  of  the nobilities  of  three  gems.  Especially,  recollection  of  the  nobility  of  the  Buddha  and recollection of the death are suitable to practice in this time. It is better for every ***meditator*** the fact that the four protective meditations must been developed previously, i.e., recollection of the nobility of the Buddha, meditation of loving-kindness, recollection of the death and meditation of repulsiveness. 

For  a such time, as mentioned above, due to  ability of practice on balanced five controlling,  faculties,  seven  factors  of  enlightenment,  the  mind  of  meditation  in  the continuum of ***meditator*** has neither fall back nor wandering to take the object of the specific characters of the four great elements. It is stable on its object because of the presence of tranquility of mind. The balanced mind follows the path of ***samatha***, and it is able to neglect on the object of the specific characters of the four great elements with neutral feeling. Thus it should be practiced as mentioned in previous section, mindfulness of breathing, in order to attain balanced five controlling faculties, seven factors of enlightenment accordingly. 

20. **One usually falls into life-continuum (*Bhavanga*)** 

By the time the beginning of reaching into the field of access concentration, some ***meditators*** usually fall into life-continuum (***bhavanga***) sometimes. At that time, the specific characters of the four great elements has been neglected to discern by knowledge. Those kinds of ***meditators*** usually say that they are in the state of unconsciousness without knowing anything. The ***meditator*** thinks like that because the mind of the life-continuum (***bhavanga citta***) always takes the object of near death consciousness of adjacent previous life of himself. In this stage it is very difficult to understand the fact that the mind of the life-continuum takes the object of near death consciousness of adjacent previous life, for that ***meditator***. Only when he reaches the stage of ***paccayapariggaha*** ***ñāņa*** (Knowledge of causal relationship), can he understand exactly on the life-continuum. 

**PAGE-607** 

If  he  always  enters  into  the  life-continuum  (become  unconscious  state),  he  must endeavour to fulfill three factors of enlightenment, i.e., wisdom, effort and bliss with the help of mindfulness factor. Then he must try to balance among controlling factors and among factors of enlightenment respectively. The mind of meditation must be fixed onto the object of the specific characters of the four great elements only. Then the concentration should be developed continuously in order to become strong. 

21. **Previous signs** 

When the mind of meditation fixes onto the object of the specific characters of the four great elements about one or two hours etc. and the concentration becomes strong it must be emphasized only on those characters without reciting or recognizing as the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element. If both specific characters of the four great elements appear in knowledge simultaneously, the mind of meditation must be fixed on those characters.  When the mind of meditation and it’s object become oneness with each other, the  concentration becomes stronger and  stronger with the result that brilliant light appear in the knowledge indeed. 

22. **Experiences of some *meditators*** 

When the concentration becomes strong in some ***meditators***, they think that their bodies become enlarge gradually before brilliant light appear. It is the sign of significant appearance of elements for them. At that time, it is suitable to discern external objects of the nature of the four great elements gradually. 

23. **Appearance in external aspect *Pāli Quotation (Mahāṭī-1-435)* PAGE-608** 

If the specific characters of the four great elements will be scrutinized at the external world by analytical knowledge, human beings, animals who are surrounding and dwelling around the ***meditator***, will be appeared as only the nature of the four great elements in the insight of the latter. Behavioral actions of those beings will also be appeared as the automatic actions produced by machines of the four great elements, in the knowledge of the ***meditator***. The ingested foods and drinks of those beings will also be appeared as the four great elements which are put inside the four great elements. (***Mahāṭī-1-435***) 

However, in this stage, because it is not finished to discern internal thoroughly, it must be continued to discern internal only but not external ones. After thoroughly discerned on  internal  up  to  the  field  of  ultimate  corporeality  and  mentality,  it  is  better  to  discern external ones systematically. 

When  the  characters  of  elements  become  apparent  and  expand,  some  ***meditator*** usually afraid of those objects. It must not be fearful on those objects but continued to fulfill developed concentration by trying to balance various nature of elements accordingly. Mostly it can be occurred like that when the time, close to see corporeal units. 

In the sight of some ***meditators***, the whole body disappears and the bulk of the four great  elements  become  solidified,  smaller  and  smaller.  This  condition  has  usually  been occurred  because  the  ***meditator***  emphasizes  only  any  one  point  inside  the  body  without discerning overall as general. At that time, it must not pay attention on the size of bulk of elements whether it is big or small but only on the nature of elements. 

In this stage, due to moderate strong concentration which is developed by taking the object of the four great elements, every element, which is intended to be emphasized, become very apparent. It is essential not to flit about in mind of meditation. This stage is a period before  reach  to  the  field  of  ultimate  reality  because  of  lack  of  ability  to  break  down compactness of corporeality by insight. It is the time unable to overcome the field of concept and  if  the  mind  flits  about,  the  signs  mixed  with  conceptual  forms  usually  appear  in knowledge. Therefore this is critical time for developing concentration by emphasizing on the specific characters of the four great elements continuously. 

Between two persons, one thinks that the bulk of elements become enlarge and the other, however, thinks it become small, the latter person, sometimes, usually has sharp and strong  concentration.  For  exception,  the  former  one  usually  has  sharp  and  strong concentration, sometimes. 

**PAGE-609** 

24. **White clear block** 

When  the  concentration  become  stronger,  the  ***meditator***  who  never  reach neighbourhood  concentration,  usually  finds  white  or  grayish  white  block  previously. However, in this stage, the mode of occurrence of this object varies among them. Some ***meditator***  recognize  the  light  first  while  some  others,  white  block  previously.  Those ***meditators***  with  weak power  of  light  recognize  white block previously  while  those  with strong power of light, recognize that light first, later on the white block. 

The beginning of appearance of white block is grayish coloured, not clear in some ***meditators***. If they emphasize only on the object of the four great elements without seeing that white block, and mind of meditation is stable on its object continuously, the grayish white  coloured  block  becomes  clear  white  as  cotton  wool.  This  white  coloured  block  is precursor of clear transparent block. If the mind of meditation continues to emphasize on the specific characters of the four great elements without taking to heart that white object, he can understand well on this white block as the bulk of four great elements only. 

If he is unable to understand like that but the white block is not easily disappeared, he must discern the nature of hardness of the whole body and that of hardness of the white block alternatively. After frequently practiced, the nature of hardness occurring in the white block can be seen apparently by insight knowledge. Similarly, the remaining 11 kinds of nature of elements must be discerned continuously. Within the white block, if all kinds of nature, i.e., hardness,  roughness,  heaviness,  softness,  smoothness,  lightness,  flowing,  cohesion,  heat, coldness, supporting, pushing, have been seen apparently by knowledge, discern as the earth- element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element. Then develop concentration again. 

However, most ***meditators*** usually find that the beginning of appearance of white block is unstable and appeared for moment and disappear alternatively. At that time, the mind of meditation must be emphasized on original object of the nature of the four great elements, and try to fix onto that object continuously. If the white block always appears as soon as he practice and long lasting about half hour or an hour, 12 kinds of nature of the four great elements  must  be  discerned  as  mentioned  above.  Then  develop  concentration  again  by discerning as the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element. 

**PAGE-610** 

If the four great elements can be discerned at that white block and the concentration is also well developed, it becomes clear and transparent gradually. Then that clear transparent block must be discerned in order to see the nature of the four great elements. The mind of meditation must be fixed on that object. The higher in concentration, the greater in wisdom successively.  When  the  wisdom  knowing  the  nature  of  the  four  great  elements,  become strong the brilliant light usually appear. That light is so bright that it reflects the eye clear sensitivity resulting eyes smart. It can effect tear-drop around the eye as looking on bright sun. At that time, it should not emphasized on light but on the nature of the four  great elements. When he has well-experience with shining light he can resist the effect of brilliant light. The commentator explained, with regard to that kind of shining light, the fact that “***dhātuppabhedāvabhāsana paññāpariggahito***” = “ which is possessing the function to show various specific characters of the four great elements by its light of wisdom, which is kept in mind by wisdom”,. (***Visuddhi-1-347***) 

In this case, it is one point to notice that some ***meditators***, sometime, find clear or white block in front of him but not inside body. If white block appears external, it should not emphasize on it and he must continue to discern the nature of four great element inside body. After the whole body becomes white, the nature of the four great element within it must be discerned and then the clear transparent block can be found gradually. 

In some ***meditators*** at the beginning of the appearance of clear transparent block, it appears irregular patches in shape, on the breast in some, on the face or on the head in some respectively. At that time it should not emphasized on that white or clear transparent patch but on remaining parts of body without spreading white. Then the white or clear transparent block  will  spread  out  throughout  body.  It  can  be  seen  the  whole  body  as  icy  block  or transparent glass block in his knowledge. The body clear sensitivity (***kāya pasāda***) is a kind of  corporeality  which  is  spreading  the  whole  body.  Because  tactile  consciousness (***kāyavinñāņa***) occurs depending upon body clear sensitivity, the latter present all parts of body where is able to know touch. It can be seen clear transparent block inside the whole body due to unable to breakdown the compactness of corporeality. Discern continuously on that icy block or glass block-like body n order to see the nature of the four great elements. Develop  concentration  by  continuous  discerning  on  that  object  which  always  appear  in knowledge whenever he discern on it. 

**PAGE-611** 

If one can not understand the nature of the four great elements within the clear block, he must discern alternately on the whole body and the clear transparent block, which are composed  of  the  hardness,  roughness,  heaviness,  etc.  Then  develop  concentration continuously by taking the object of the nature of the four great elements. 

25. **Wholesome persons with great previous perfection (*pāramita*)** 

Wholesome persons, because they had experienced with ability to see the ultimate corporeality by knowledge in previous life usually see the corporeal units by merely discern on clear transparent block, as four great elements, after break down clear transparent block, easily. 

26. **(a) Discern the space-element (*ākāsa*)** 

However, if those ***meditators*** had not experienced with ability to see the ultimate corporeality by knowledge in previous lives, the clear transparent block never break down to corporeal units by merely discern on clear transparent block as the four great elements. At that time, the space-element on clear transparent block, must be discerned by insight. 

The  Buddha  preached  Venerable  ***Rāhula***  to  discern  the  space-element  in  ***Mahā- Rāhulovāda  Sutta  (M-2-86)***.  The  commentator  explained  the  reason  of  why  the  Buddha preached to discern the space-element, as follows: 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-3-97) (M-ṭī-2-63)*** 

**PAGE-612** 

It is reasonable to preach in detail of the four great elements which are deserving to discern by three general characters. However, it is a question that why the Buddha preached in detail of the space-element which is, indeed, not deserving to discern by three general characters. It can be answered that because the Buddha wanted to instruct to discern derived corporealities (***upāda*** ***rūpa***), The Buddha preached in detail of the space-element. 

* ***vuttammhi ekadhamme, ye dhammā ekalakkhanātena.   vuttā bhavanti sabbe, itti vutto lakkhaņohāro.*** 
- If the Buddha preaches to discern any kind of ultimate ***dhamma***, it is also intended 

to preach to discern all kinds of ultimate ***dhamma*** which have same character as that kind. Thus all ***dhamma*** which have the same character are interpreted as a common, and this kind of preaching methodology is known as ***Lakkhaņāhāra netti***. 

In ***Mahārāhulovada*** ***Sutta***, the Buddha preached to discern the space-element in order to  intend  to  instruct  that  all  derived  corporealities,  which  has  same  characters,  must  be discerned, according to ***lakkhaņāhāranetti***. In this ***Sutta***, before the space-element had been preached,  the  Buddha  preached  the  four  great  element  previously,  but  not  on  derived corporeality. The Buddha preached in detail of the space-element in order to intend to instruct to discern the space-element associating with derived corporealities. The space-element is a kind of derived corporeality depending upon the four great elements. The remaining 23 kinds of derived corporealities are also occurred depending upon the four great elements. Thus the space-element and remaining 23 kinds of derived corporealities have the same character, way of occurrence depending  on the four great elements, due to this reason the Buddha preached only the space-element as a common, according to ***lakkhaņāhāranetti***. 

The Buddha preached in detail of the space-element not only intended to instruct to discern  as  a  common  but  also  intended  to  show  easy  way  of  discerning  on  corporeal ***dhamma***. Actually, if a ***meditator*** is able to discern the space-element which is demarcating between  corporeal  units  not  to  mix  each  other,  all  corporeal  units  demarcated  by  spce- element is also apparent in the knowledge of the ***meditator*** vice versa. 

**PAGE-613** 

In the continuum of ***meditator***, who is seeing a group of corporeal units which are demarcated by space-element, it can be reached to know and see the four great elements and derived corporealities within each corporeal unit. The Buddha preached the space-element in order to show the occurrence like that apparently. ***(M-A-3-97, M-ṭī-2-63)*** 

26. **(b) How to discern the space-element** 

Although the four great elements had been discerned on the clear transparent block, if the latter has not broken down yet, the space-element within that block must be emphasized by the help of light. When arm is observed, it looks like without opening, but there is many openings  of  hair-roots  which  can  be  seen  by  careful  observation.  Similarly,  it  must  be scrutinized on clear transparent block in order to see the space-element. As soon as the space- element has been found, the corporeal units can also be found simultaneously by insight knowledge. 

27. **‘6’ kinds of clear sensitivities** 
1. ***cakkhupasāda*** = eye-clear-sensitivity 
1. ***sotapasāda*** = ear-clear-sensitivity 
1. ***ghānapasāda*** = nose-clear-sensitivity 
1. ***jhivhāpasāda*** = tongue-clear-sensitivity 
1. ***kāyapasāda*** = body-clear-sensitivity 

There are 5 kinds of corporeal clear sensitivities. 

6. ***manopasāda*** = mind-clear-sensitivity, 

It is one kind only for mental clear sensitivity. Totally, there are all 6 kinds of clear 

sensitivities. 

Body-clear-sensitivities  present  throughout  body  where  it  is  able  to  know  tactile object. This is because body-consciousness (touching consciousness) which is able to know tactile  object,  can  occur  depending  upon  body  clear  sensitivity.  Five  kinds  of  corporeal sensitivities including body clear sensitivity can not been seen before the space-element has been seen resulting corporeal units can be seen as clear transparent block continuously. 

***Pāli Quotaton (Visuddhi-2-81)*** 

According  to  this  explanation  found  in  commentary,  because  five  kinds  of  clear sensitivities, such as, eye clear sensitivity, etc., are dependent factor for respective objects, such as colour-object, etc., these are, like mirror, so clear that called clear sensitivities (***pasād rūpa***). (***Visuddhi-2-81***) 

**PAGE-614** 

When the space-element within the clear transparent block can be seen by the help of light produced by knowledge which is associating with the concentration, the corporeal units will be seen simultaneously. 

The Buddha preached the fact that “the consciousness of life-continuum (***bhavańga***) is brilliant white in colour”, in ***iccharāsanghāta Vagga, Paņihitaiccha Vagga, Ekka Nipāta, Anguttara Nikāya (Angl-9)***. The Buddha preached these words so as to intend the fact that the consciousness of the life-continuum is brilliant white due to absence of defilements called ***uppakkilesa*** which are the cause of impurity of mind, such as lust, anger, delusion etc. It means that the consciousness of life-continuum has neither colour nor light, but clear and purified due to lack of impurity. However, the colour consisting in the mind produced pure octad and the colour consisting in pure octad produced by temperature which is consisting in the mind produced pure octad, are bright depending on the power of knowledge associating with the consciousness of the life-continuum. The higher the knowledge, the brighter the colour of those pure octads produced by mind and temperature. 

In ***Mūlaṭīkā***, ***1-125***, explained that “***sabhāvovāyam cittassa paņdaratā***” = “all kinds of consciousness are, naturally, clear and purified.”. 

***Pāli-Quotation (Ang-Com-1-46)*** 

- It can be said the fact that the consciousness of life-continuum, which is naturally 

clear and purified, becomes impurity due to presence of defilements (***upakkilesa***) which are produced by the consciousness associated with attachment, (***lobha***), the nature of adhering to object; the consciousness associated with anger (***dosa***), the consciousness associated with delusion (***moha***), during consecutive occurrence of consciousness of thought processes, as a result of contact of object and door. ***(Ang-1-46)*** 

28. **Like water flow, like candle flame** 

For some ***meditators***, during developing concentration by taking the object of the specific  characters  of  the  four  great  elements,  if  he  scrutinizes  on  those  characters continuously, the continuous processes of occurrence of the four great elements appear like water flow or candle flame, before clear sensitivities can be found.  

**PAGE-615** 

The nature of corporealities are found as beginning stage before compactness of continuity, compactness of form, etc. had been broken by insight knowledge. At that time, it must be continuously discerned on the object of the four great elements and then the nature of the four  great elements becomes clearer and clearer gradually. If it is continuously emphasized on those  clear  transparent  block  as  the  nature  of  the  four  great  elements,  the  beginning  of corporealunits will be found easily. If the corporeal units can not be found easily, the space- element must be discern as mentioned above. At the beginning stage to find corporeal units, t is the same mode to see the occurrence like water flow or candle flame. However, this stage has not reached to the field of ultimate reality indeed. 

29. **The size of block, big or small** 

When some ***meditator*** emphasize the space-element on clear transparent block, they find large size of corporeal units which are not natural size, about rice seed or been etc.. In knowledge of some ***meditators*** these are like small beads of diamonds, spreading on black velvet. At that time, it must be discerned on those corporeal units whether they are big or small  in  size  in  order  to  see  the  specific  characters  of  the  fur  great  elements.  Beads  of corporeal units will be broken down to smaller ones up to smallest size. If large beads of corporeal units are not easily broken down to smaller ones by discerning as the four great elements, it must be discerned the space-element on the former with the result that the natural size of corporeal units can be seen easily by eye of wisdom. 

Some ***meditators*** with great previous perfections are able to see minute corporeal units which are may be smaller than ***paramā*** minute particles as soon as they emphasize the space-element on the clear transparent block. 

30. **By the time the beginning of corporeal units can be seen** 

By the time, the beginning of corporeal units can be seen, it can be found those units are arising and fading away very rapidly. In the commentary of ***Sam-yutta Nikāya –Com-2- 295***, it is explained that…. 

***“ekiccharakkhaņe kotisatasahassa sankhā nirujjhati”.*** 

- “the  mental  ***dhamma***  arise  and  pass  away  million  million  times  within  one 

second”.., and then the life span of mental ***dhamma*** can be said, only bout one millionth per pico-second, indeed. 

According to scriptures, it is explained that the corporeal ***dhamma*** exist 17 times to mental moment (***cittakkhana***), and then the life-span of corporeal ***dhamma*** can be said, about one trillionth second only. Thus the rate of the processes of arising and passing away of corporeal ***dhamma*** is also beyond compare rapid indeed. 

According to scriptures, it is explained that the corporeal ***dhamma*** exist 17 times to mental moment (***cittakkhaņa***), and then the life-span of corporeal ***dhamma*** can be said, about one trillionth second only. Thus the rate of the processes of arising and passing away of corporeal ***dhamma*** is also beyond compare rapid indeed. 

**PAGE-616** 

If  ***vipassanā***  practice  has  been  taken  place  by  seeing  arising  and  passing  away corporeal units, it can be said that it is only in the stage of concept (***paññatti***). That kind of way of practice is unable to lead to ***nibbāna*** due to lack of ability to see the ultimate reality. Only when one is able to see the underived and derived corporealities, such as the earth- element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element consisting in corporeal units, by analytical knowledge, can he reach to the field of ultimate reality by insight knowledge. The ultimate corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** are deserving to generalize by three characters, such as  impermanence,  suffering,  non-self.  Those  ***dhamma***  only  are  the  object  of  ***vipassanā*** practice. True ***vipassanā*** knowledge can be occurred by discerning as three general characters on the ultimate corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** only. 

According to ***Susima*** ***Sutta***, (***Samyotta-1-344***), the Noble Path-Knowledge, which is able  to  take  the  object  of  ***nibbāna***,  can  be  occurred  only  at  the  end  of  true  ***vipassanā*** knowledge. If it is not real ***vipassanā*** knowledge, the real Noble Path-Knowledge can not be occurred as a result. Thus it can be said that the ultimate ***dhamma*** called ***nibbāna*** can be reached through the ultimate realities called corporeality and mentality, indeed. 

31. **The size of corporeal unit** 

***Pāli Quotation (Mahāṭī-1-477, Abhi-Com-2-328)*** 

Dust particles, which are raised by car and bullock cart, can be seen by naked eye and are called ***rathareņumyū***. One-thirty sixth part (1/36) of ***rathareņumyū*** is a kind of minute particle called ***tijjhāremyū***. The mist which can be seen in the sun light penetrating through wall  are  ***tijjhāremyū***.  One-thirty  sixth  part  (1/36)  of  ***tijjhāremyū***  is  called  ***aņumyū***  sub particle. Then one-thirty sixth part (1/36) of ***aņumyū*** is called ***paramāņumyū***. 

The size of a corporeal unit is same about ***paramāņumyū***. Those corporeal units, the size of about ***paramāņumyū***, belongs to the space ***koṭṭhāsa (ākāsa koṭṭhāsika)***. It means the fact that a such place where is full of corporeal units seems to be space and those corporeal units can not be seen by naked eye. Actually, those care not the object of natural eye (=seeing consciousness) (***mamsa*** ***cakkhu***), but that of divine eye (***dibba*** ***cakkhu***). 

(It means that those corporeal units can be seen by the help of light produced by super psychic knowledge of divine eye (***dibba cakkhu abhiññāņa***). However, powerful light can also be produced by mind of ***samatha***, ***vipassanā*** meditation, like super psychic knowledge of divine eye, and those corporeal units can be seen by the help of light produced by the former.  It  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  the  commentator  and  sub-commentator explained by means of ***lakkhaņāhāra netti*** method. Thus ***suddhavipassanā yānika*** person and ***samathayānika*** person, who are unable to attain super-psychic knowledge, can change to ***vipassanā*** stage.) 

**PAGE-617** 

32. **One difficult problem** 

Sometimes,  when  some  ***meditators***  emphasize  the  space-element  on  the  clear transparent block, the clear transparent block becomes disappear. At that time, the original object, the four great elements must be discerned again. Then, that clear transparent block will be reappear again as a result of fixed mind of meditation on the object of the four great elements. When those ***meditators*** who have weak concentration give up the object of the four great elements and emphasize on the space element, clear transparent block will usually be disappeared  as  a  result  of  insufficient  concentration.  When  the  power  of  concentration becomes powerful, it can not be disappeared easily but it can be seen like water flow or candle flame by insight knowledge continuously. 

33. **Four great elements and clear sensitivity element** 

Now, it would be presented on the relationship between the four great elements and clear sensitivities of corporeality. 

* ***rūpābhighātārahabhūtappssāda lakkhaņam….p….cakkhu. (Visuddhi-2-74)*** 

In ***Visuddhi*** ***magga***, it is explained that the eye clear sensitivity (***cakkhu*** ***pssāda***) has the nature of transparency of the four great elements which are deserving to strike together with colour object. Similarly, it is explained that the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, clear sensitivities,  also  have  the  nature  of  transparency  of  the  four  great  elements  which  are deserving  to  strike  together  with  respective  objects.  The  clear  transparent  block  of corporeality, therefore, means the nature of transparency of the four great elements, which is deserving to strike together with specific object, such as colour, sound, etc… and respective clear  sensitivity,  such  as  eye,  ear.  etc.  Because  of  this  reason,  if  a  ***meditator***  give  up discerning on the four great elements, he can see neither the nature of the four great elements nor the nature of transparency of the four great elements. When he discern on the space- element, he is unable to see the clear transparent block as a result sometimes. Therefore, at that  time,  it  is  essential  to  develop  concentration  by  taking  the  object  of  the  four  great elements continuously. When he has fulfilled powerful concentration, the clear transparent block  will  never  disappear  and  then  the  space-element  must  be  discerned  again.  The corporeal units can be found easily by insight knowledge. 

**PAGE-618** 

34. **Be careful not to misleading path** 

Corporeal units is the smallest system of corporeality in the field of conventional reality (***samuti*** ***sacca***). The smallest corporeal system, a kind of corporeal unit, consists of at least 8 kinds of nature of corporeality, i.e., the earth-element, the water-element, the fire- element, the air=element, colour, smell, taste, nutriment. In some kinds, if the life-faculty is present, it consists of a factors, and if the clear sensitivity or sex-corporeality is present, it consists  of  10  factors.  Only  when  those  nature  of  corporealities  consisting  within  each 

corporeal unit, 8,9,10, kinds, etc… it can be reached to the field of ultimate reality actually. It can be attained the discriminative  knowledge on the corporeality  (***rūpapariccheda*** ***ñāņa***) when the specific character of each corporeality can be discerned by insight. Indeed, this stage is only knowing real nature of corporeality but not finished to practice and various ways of practice still remain to be continued. 

If  a ***meditator***  takes place ***vipassanā*** practice by  taking  the  object  of  arising  and passing away of those corporeal units, it can be said that the concept only is discerned as ***vipassanā*** practice due to unable to uncover compactness of form. Only when he is able to discern specific characters of each corporeality, consisting within various kinds of corporeal units, i.e., 8 factors,9 factors, 10 factors, etc., by analytical knowledge, the compactness of form will be broken down and it is uncovered from the concept of form. However, if it is taken place ***vipassanā*** practice on the concept of form, i.e. the bulk of corporeal units, it is not durable for long time. Then the corporeal units become disappear gradually and the clear transparent block reappear again. Indeed, only the ultimate ***dhamma*** are resistant to discern by ***vipassanā*** practice. If he fixes his mind of meditation to the transparent block, it is stable on the object due to sufficient concentration. At that time, the ***meditator*** usually says that “the corporeality is ceased”. Then if he decrease effort to discern the object gradually, he falls into the  life-continuum  (=  sleeping  condition)  due  to  lack  of  ability  to  sustain  by  factors  of absorption,  such  as  ***vitakka***,  ***vicāra***,  ***pīti***,  ***sukha***,  ***ekaggatā***.  Some  suggests  that  “both corporeality  and  mentality  cease”  for  that  condition.  Indeed,  this  stage  is  still  knowing nothing, even real corporeal and mentality as they really are. 

**PAGE-619** 

Generally, most peoples who say like that, are without fulfilling strong concentration by any one subject of meditation among forty ways and they are able to see corporeal units, depending on their previous perfection, but not through systematic discerning on the four great elements. They are quite far from ability to discern the nature of four great elements with each corporeal unit because of the absence of systematic approach to the four elements meditation previously. For any ***meditator*** who is unable to discern very quickly on the nature of four great elements, it is very difficult to discern those nature of corporeal units which are arising and passing away very rapidly. It is able to reach to the field of ultimate reality when it is able to distinguish specific nature of four great elements consisting in corporeal units of various kinds of insight. Corporeal units are only at the stage of smallest system of mass, covered by  form-concept, shape-concept etc.  It  must be changed to the field of ultimate reality from the stage of seeing those kinds of concept. It is similar to unpurified gold and can be said that “it is true gold, but not purified.” 

35. **Toward the field of ultimate reality** 

If it is impossible to discern the four great elements within each corporeal unit due to rapid  rate  of  processes  of  arising  and  passing  away  of  those  units,  it  should  not  be emphasized on those processes of arising and passing away of corporeal units but on the specific characters of the four great elements. The ***meditator*** with previous perfection will be successful to discern the ultimate nature of elements easily. 

It must be emphasized on many corporeal units as a common or all kinds of corporeal units generally or the whole body generally, and discerned as the specific character of each elements respectively. Develop concentration by taking the object of the specific characters 

of the four great elements alternatively. When the concentration become strong an powerful, the  specific  character  of  each  element  within  a  corporeal  unit  by  penetrative  knowledge systematically. 

Roughly, all kinds of corporeal units can be divided into two groups, i.e., transparent corporeal unit and non-transparent corporeal unit. Corporeal units with any kind of clear sensitivities of five kinds are transparent ones but remaining, non-transparent ones. Both two kinds of transparent and non-transparent ones mixed together throughout body. It must be discerned on the four great elements within both kinds of transparent and non-transparent corporeal units continuously. Alternative discernment must be taken place on all corporeal units generally, and on each corporeal unit individually. It can be successful. 

**PAGE-620** 

36. **(a) Practise to balance among controlling faculties, factors of enlightenment** 

If  it  is  not  successful,  5  kinds  of  controlling  faculties  or  7  kinds  of  factors  of enlightenment must be balanced. Develop concentration again by the way of mindfulness of breathing up to fourth absorption which has 8 qualities. Then develop concentration by taking the object of the nature of the four great elements. When the clear transparent block appears, emphasizes on the space-element in order to see corporeal units. Then it must be discerned generally on the object of the four great elements of those corporeal units. Practise to balance 7 factors of enlightenment.  

1. ***satisambojjhańga*** = the factor of mindfulness which is keeping in mind the specific characters of the four great elements repeatedly and continuously. 
1. ***dhammavicayasambojjhańga***  =  the  factor  of  wisdom  which  is  scrutinizing  and knowing penetratively each specific character of the four great elements, 
1. ***vīriyasambojjhańga*** = the factor of effort which is trying to know and concentrate the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***pītisambojjhańga*** = the factor of bliss which is complete happiness of the mind of meditation to take the object the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***passaddhisambojjhańga*** = the factor of tranquility which is calm and peaceful mind of meditation on the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***samādhisambojjhańga*** = the factor of concentration which is stability of the mind, in order to fix on the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 
1. ***upekkhāsambojjhańga***  =  the  factor  of  neutrality  which  is  able  to  equal  mind  of meditation neither to be enthusiastic nor fall back to take the object of the specific characters of the four great elements, 

It must be practiced to balance among these 7 factors of enlightenment. In order to become strong power in factor of wisdom, effort, bliss, it must be eagerly scrutinized on the specific characters of the four great elements continuously. In order to become strong power in factor of tranquility, concentration, neutrality, it must be fixed the mind of meditation, in relax position, to the object of the four great elements. 

When the factor of wisdom and concentration are balanced, or when five kinds of controlling  faculties  or  seven  kinds  of  factors  of enlightenment  are balanced,  it  must be discerned 12 kinds of nature of the four great elements alternatively within each corporeal unit. 
**PAGE-621** 

**4.36 (b) Way of practice** 

Discern the nature of hardness of all corporeal units throughout body as a common. Then discern the nature of hardness of a corporeal unit repeatedly and frequently. Corporeal units will be rapidly arising and passing away. If a corporeal unit which is discerned to see the hardness, disappears in insight, the nature of hardness of the next corporeal unit must be discerned successively. Thus if the nature of hardness can be found in each corporeal unit by eye  of  wisdom,  the  nature  of  roughness  must  be  discerned  similarly.  Then  it  must  be practiced in order to see both two nature, the hardness and roughness, simultaneously within every corporeal unit by eye wisdom. 

In this way, the remaining specific characters  of the four  great elements must be discerned successively one after another. When 12 kinds of nature of elements can be seen within a corporeal unit, discern to see the object of the four great elements simultaneously within a corporeal unit. When the concentration and wisdom become strong powerful, the nature of the four great elements will be apparent simultaneously in insight. Then it must be discerned on the nature of the four great elements of both transparent and non-transparent corporeal units at 6 doors, i.e., eye, ear, nose, tongue, body and heart. If it is successful to discern the four great elements consisting in each corporeal unit, the concentration which is the  peak  of  concentration  of  sensuous  world,  is  called  the  neighbourhood  concentration (***upacāra Samādhi***) by means of a metaphor called ***sadisupacāra*** (same condition).  

During  the  concentration  of  sensuous  world  has  been  developed,  it  must  be recognized to emphasize and discern four kinds of specific characters, i.e. 

1. the nature of hardness (for the earth-element) 
1. the nature of flowing ( for the water-element) 
1. the nature of heat (for the fire-element) 
1. the nature of supporting (for the air-element). 
36. **(c) The meaning of “as possible as”** 

It would be explained the fact that 12 kinds of nature of the four great elements can be seen, as possible as he can, within a corporeal unit. 

Within  a  corporeal  unit,  if  hardness,  roughness,  heaviness  are  apparent,  softness, smoothness, lightness are not apparent and vice versa, for the earth-element. 

For  the  nature  of  water-element, both  the  flowing  and  cohesion  can be  apparent. However, any one kind usually become stronger powerful in one corporeal unit. 

Then, if the nature of heat is apparent, the coldness become unapparent and vice versa, for the fire-element. 

**PAGE-622** 

Furthermore both  the  nature  of  supporting  and pushing  of  the  air-element  can be apparent within one corporeal unit. The nature of supporting is the specific character, while the pushing, the specific function of the air-element respectively. The practicing ***meditator*** should like to discern careful on elements. (***Mahāṭī-2-108-109***) 

37. **Misperception of being and self can be removed** 

Thus the Buddha preached, in order to intend a such stage at which it is able to reach the  field  of  ultimate  reality  after  break  down  of  three  compactness  of  corporeality  by analytical knowledge, in ***Dhātumanasīkārapabba, Mahāsatipatthāna Sutta***, as follows. 

***Pāli Quotation (M-1-73)*** 

- ***Bhikkhus***! As a simile, either the experienced cattle slaughter or his follower killed 

a  cow  and  then  skins  and  cuts  up  carcass  of  cattle at  crossroads,  the  ***bhikkhu***  discerns, scrutinizes and takes to heart the body which is situating as it’s position accordingly like this “this body consists of the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the air-element” etc. one by one, by means of the nature of elements, but not person, beings, and living self. (***M-1-73***) 

It is also explained in commentary and sub-commentary as follows. ***Pāli Quotation (Dī-A-2-361, M-A-1-276) (Dī-ṭī-2-309, M-ṭī-1-365, 366)*** 

In the knowledge of ***meditator***, who is discerning on the nature of each element, such as,  the  earth-element,  the  water-element,  the  fire-element,  the  air-element,  within  each corporeal unit by analytical knowledge, in order to break down, three kinds of compactness, i.e. 

1. ***santatighāna*** = the compactness of continuity of corporeality 
1. ***samūhaghāna*** = the compactness of form of corporeality 
1. ***kiccaghāna***  =  the  compactness  of  function  of  corporeality,  two  kinds  of misperception, i.e., 

**PAGE-623** 

1. ***sattasaññā*** = misperception of beings which always follows wrong view of self (***atta*** ***diṭṭhi***) by which some one obsesses the fact that the live-body, the consciousness- body, the self-body is apparently present, and 
1. misperception of beings which is occurred by means of conventional reality (***vohāra*** ***sacca***, in accordance with the terminology of human beings, such as, “male, female, person, beings, human beings, ***deva***, brahmas are really present in the world”, etc. will be  disappeared.  Mind  of  meditation  is  situated  well  on  the  four  great  element consisting in each corporeal unit. ***(Dī-Com-2-361, M-Com-1-276, Dī-ṭī-2-309, M-ṭī-1- 365, 366)*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Mahāṭī-1-446)*** 

- This four element meditation which is able to keep in mind and discern and take to 

heart the nature of element, has a beneficial result to remove misperception of beings. The way of practice by which the ultimate corporeality and mentality are analyzed in order to break  down  compactness  of  both  corporeal  and  mental  ***dhamma***,  is  essential  to  remove misperception  of  beings.  Therefore  it  should  be  endeavour  to  know  and  see  ultimate corporealities consisting various bodily parts, such as hair, bodily hair etc., which are of various kinds, 8, 16, 44 kinds etc.. by means of analytical knowledge. (***Mahāṭī-1-466***) 

According to these explanations found in ***Pāli***, commentary and sub-commentary, if the nature of the four great elements consisting in each corporeal unit can be discerned, 

distinguished  and  kept  in  mind  by  analytical  knowledge,  it  begins  to  reach  the  field  of ultimate reality. The misperception of beings has also been removed. Very strong obsession which  is  rooted  along  with  the  round  of  rebirths,  on  the  fact  that  “the  living-body, consciousness-body,  self-body  are  really  present,  male,  female,  person,  beings,  human beings, ***deva***, brahmas re really present”, begins to be removed. At that time, if the four great elements of the external world are scrutinized by insight knowledge, all living and non-living becomes  huge  community  of  corporeal  units  and  those  are  only  bulk  of  the  four  great elements. 

However,  it  is  essential  to  practice  by  means  of  successive  way  of  systematic approach in order to attain the first Path-Knowledge (***sotapattimagga ñāņa***) by which three kinds of fire of hell, i.e., misperception of beings,  misperception of self, wrong view of personality, will be extinguished for good. The successive way of practice, therefore, will be presented continuously. 

**PAGE-624** 

As above mentioned, the peak of concentration of sensuous world can be called the neighbourhood  concentration  by  means  of  preaching  methodology,  ***sadisūpacāra***  (same condition) and it must be noticed on one fact as follow. 

During  practicing  like  this,  the  power  of  light  is  strongly  present.  However, sometimes, when either the concentration become fall back or mind of meditation is shaken by  defilements  (***nīvaaņa***),  the  power  of  light  becomes  fall  back.  At  that  time,  develop concentration  by  means  of  either  mindfulness  of  breathing  or  the  four  great  elements meditation and then the brilliant light will be appear again. 

**4.38. (a) Practise on (32) bodily parts (*koṭṭhāsa*)** 

When the power of light become strong, it hairs, bodily hairs, nails, claws, teeth, skins are discerned successively, it will be seen easily by insight knowledge. It should be discerned on  those  bodily  parts  by  group-wise  system,  i.e.  20  kinds  of  bodily  parts,  that  are predominant with the earth-element, can be divided into 4 groups,5 bodily parts in each group and 12 kinds of bodily parts, that are predominant with the water-element, can be divided into 2 groups, 6 bodily parts in each group, etc. At the beginning stage of some ***meditators***, the objects of bodily parts usually become unclear in insight. At that time the concentration must be developed again. When the light of concentration become brighter, discern on those bodily parts again. When the objects can be seen like image on the mirror, it is enough to develop sufficient concentration. Then it must be continued to practice in order to see clearly from hair to urine (32nd bodily part) and from urine to hair. If it is able to discern all bodily parts simultaneously, it is proficiently successful in internal object.  

38. **(b) How can be appeared in the insight external objects *Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-242)*** 

32 kinds of various flowers are made to form a garland. When a man with clear sight look at that garland, all 32 kinds of various flowers are apparent in him. Around a piece of land is surrounded by fence with    32 posts. When a man with clear sight look at that fence, all posts are apparent in him. Similarly, 32 bodily parts of external beings are apparently appeared  in  the  knowledge  of  the  ***meditator***.  That  ***meditator***  is  unable  to  recognize  on wandering animals and human beings as beings but only 32 bodily parts of  themselves. The ingested foods and drinks of those beings will be appeared as foods and drinks are put inside 32 bodily parts. (***Abhi-A-2-236, 242, Vs-1-257***). 

**PAGE-625** 

39. **Three ways of practice *Pāli Quotation (Abhi-Com-2-243)*** 
- After proficiently discerns on both internal and external bodily parts, if any one of 

three entrances to enter ***nibbāna*** is applied by a ***meditator***, it will be free from defilements really. 

The object of meditation becomes appears as any one of three kinds, i.e. 

1. colour (colour-***kasiņa***) or 
1. the nature of loathsomeness or 
1. the nature of nothingness (= the nature of elements) which is void of person, begins, living-self. 

Comparison to world similes, as a lady who wants to fry sweet ***panca***kes is able to fry dough which is well done mixture of flour and water, as the water flows from the desired side if the pot filled with water is put on even surface of the ground, similarly, after proficiently discerned on both internal and external bodily parts, if any one of three entrances to enter ***nibbāna***, is applied, it will be free from defilements really. It will be appeared 

1. by means of colour (colour-***kasiņa***), 
1. by means of nature of loathsomeness, 
1. by means of the nature of nothingness 9 = the nature of elements) in accordance with his desire. (***Abhi-A-2-242, 243***) 

**PAGE-626** 

Colour-***kasiņa*** 

If it is well developed any one of the followings, 

1. brown-***kasiņa*** (***nīla*** ***kasiņa***) by taking the object of brown-coloured bodily parts, such as hair, 
1. yellow-***kasiņa*** (***pīta*** ***kasiņa***) by taking the object of yellow-coloured bodily parts, such as fat droplets, urine etc… 
1. red-***kasiņa*** (***lohita*** ***kasiņa***) by taking the object of red-coloured bodily parts,such as blood 
1. white-***kasiņa*** (***odāta*** ***kasiņa***) by taking the object of white-coloured bodily parts, such as bones, 

It  is  able  to  reach  8  kinds  of  absorptions  (***samāpatti***).  If  it  is  applied  as  the fundamental of ***vipassanā*** practice through those 8 kinds of absorptions, it is able to reach the Fruit-Knowledge called **Arahatta**. Thus four kinds of coloured ***kasiņa*** can be developed through 32 bodily parts. In ***Mahāparinibbāna*** ***Sutta*** (***Dhī-2-92, 93, 94***), the Buddha preached about those absorptions as synonyms, i.e., 1. ***abhibhāyatana jhāna*** (= the absorptions which are able to overcome opposite ***dhamma*** called hindrances and defilement; and objects of ***kasiņa***-concept),  2.  ***vimokkhajhāna***  (=  absorptions  which  are  cause  of  deliverance  from opposite ***dhamma***). 

Taking into to heart the nature of loathsomeness (***patikūlamanasīkāra***) 

In ***Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta (M-1-72)***, the Buddha preached both the way of take to heart the nature of loathsomeness of 23 bodily parts in order to reach the first absorption and the way of ***vipassanā*** practice which apply that first absorption as it’s fundamental object in order to attain the Fourth Fruit-Knowledge (***arahatta phalañāņa***). 

**Four elements meditation (*soññata*)** 

In  ***Mahāhatthipadopama***  ***Sutta***  (***M-1-242***),  and  ***Mahārāhulovāda  Sutta  (M-2-83, 89)***,  the  Buddha  preached  detailed  account  of  the  four  elements  meditation  through  the objects of 32 bodily parts and way of practice to attain the Fourth Fruit-Knowledge (***Arahatta phala ñāņa***). 

It  is  explained  in  ***Sammohavinodanī***  commentary,  related  with  meditation  of nothingness (***soññata kammaṭṭhāna***) as follows. 

***Pāli-Quotation (Abhi-Com-2-249)*** 

- If 32 bodily parts are discerned as the nature of nothingness, 96 kinds of nature of 

nothingness will be occurred. 

The hairs can be discerned as 

1. void of self (***atta***) 
1. void of possession of self 
1. void of the nature of permanence, durability, stability, without change and alteration etc. 

Thus there are three kinds of voidness for hairs, i.e., 

1. void of self (***attasoññatā***) 
1. void of possession of self (***attaniyasoññatā***) 
1. void of the nature of permanence (***niccabhāvasoññatā***). Then for 32 bodily parts, (32x3 = 96 kinds), 96 kinds of nature of nothingness will be occurred. 

**PAGE-627** 

The ***meditator*** who wants to know the nature of nothingness must discerns and keeps in mind the specific characters of the four great elements consisting in each 32 bodily parts previously. Then, after corporeal units can be seen by insight, the ultimate corporeal ***dhamma*** must be analyzed and scrutinized systematically. The mental ***dhamma***, which are occurring by taking the objects of corporeal ***dhamma*** and are depending upon the latter, must be kept in mind. Then those combination of both corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** must be discerned and discriminated  each  other  and  recognized  well.  Then  those  corporeal,  mental,  causal  and resultant ***dhamma*** occurring in three successive periods, i.e., past, present, future, must be kept in mid. After it is discerned like that those ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma*** (corporeality, mentality, causes and results) must be scrutinized by means of characteristic, function, manifestation and proximate cause. Then, if it is generalized by means of three characters, as 

1. ***anicca***  =  impermanence,  by  taking  the  object  of  arising  and  passing  away  of ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma***, 
1. ***dukkha*** = suffering, by taking the object of being oppressed by continuous processes of arising and passing away, 
1. ***anatta*** = one-self, by taking the object of the nature of non-self of ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma***, which are lack of undestructable essence and durable self, by the time appearance of ***vipassanā***  knowledge  or  if  it  is  generalized by  means  of  three  general  characters alternatively, as  
1. ***anicca*** (***aniccam khayaṭṭena***) = impermanence by taking the object of dissolution of ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma*** 
1. ***dukkha*** (***dukkham bayaṭṭhena***) = suffering by taking the object of nature of fearful condition due to continuous dissolution of those ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma*** 
1. ***anatta*** (***anattā asvrakaṭṭhena***) = non-self by taking the object of nature of non-self which is lack of durable essence of self in ***sańkhāra*** ***dhamma***, by the time appearance of ***vipassanā*** knowledge, the following nature of nothingness will be appeared as a result,  
1. void of self (***atta*** ***soññatā***) 
1. void of possession of self (***attaniya soññatā***) 
1. void of the nature of permanence (***niccabhāva soññatā***). 

This is a brief account on the way of four elements meditation. (***Abhi-Com-2-241,*** 

***242***) 

Thus three ways of practice are varied only at the stage of concentration developed. If it is able to change ***vipassanā*** practice by making that concentration as the fundamental of ***vipassanā***, it is only one way leading to ***nibbāna*** from the stage of purification of view (***diṭṭhivisuddhi***)  which  is  also  known  as  discriminative  knowledge  on  the  mentality  and corporeality (***nāmarūpapariccheda*** ***ñāņa***). 

Among  those  three  ways,  sonata  =  the  way  of  four  elements  meditation  will  be emphasized and presented in this section. If remaining ways are intended to practice, it can be found in Volume 5, section 9, section of ***Samatha*** Practice. 

**PAGE-628** 

40. **Four elements meditation, in brief and detailed account** 

The brief account of four elements meditation, up to the Fourth Fruit-Knowledge, can be  found  in  ***Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna***  ***Sutta***,  (***M-1-73***).  Detailed  account  of  four  great  elements meditation,  up  to  the  Fourth  Fruit-Knowledge,  can  be  found  in  ***Mahārāhulovāda  Sutta, Dhātuvibhańga Sutta.*** In ***Kinsukopama Sutta***, it is explained about an arahant who practiced four elements meditation. 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-A-3-98)*** 

- The third arahant who practiced the four great elements meditation both brief and 

detailed account, and took place ***vipassanā*** practice, reached to the Fourth-Fruit-Knowledge and he was called ***Mahābhūta kammaṭṭhānika*** (= who practiced the four great elements meditation). (***Sam-A-3-98***) 

In these three ways of practice discerning on the four great elements meditation, up to the Fourth Fruit-Knowledge, both brief and detailed account will be presented continuously. 

When the ***meditator*** is able to discern four great elements of both transparent and non- transparent corporeal units, situating in 6 doors, he can change to discern 32 bodily parts. 

Firstly, discern to see hairs, the first bodily part by insight. Then it must be discerned on the four great elements consisting in hairs. When he discerns on the four great elements consisting in hairs, he can find corporeal units easily. Then the four great elements of both transparent  and  non-transparent  corporeal  units  must  be  discerned  by  knowledge.  Thus remaining bodily parts must be discerned continuously. Although some bodily parts consist of both transparent and non-transparent corporeal units, some bodily parts consist of only non-transparent corporeal units. If it is successful to discern on corporeal units situating in 32 bodily parts, it must be discerned continuously on the four great elements of corporeal units situating in 6 kinds of bodily parts with air-predominant (***vāyokoṭṭhāsa***) and 4 kinds of bodily parts with fire-predominant (***tejokoṭṭhāsa***). [Way of practice in detail will be presented by tabulating method later.] 

**PAGE-629** 

41. **How derived corporealities are apparent.** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-241) (Mūlaṭī-2-154) (Anuṭī-2-156)*** 

- In the knowledge of ***meditator*** who is able to discriminate and keep in mind the 

nature  of  four  great  elements  of  each  corporeal  unit,  derived  corporealities  which  are occurring, depending  up on the four  great elements within same corporeal unit, are also apparent really. 

The four  great elements can be discriminated by  derived corporealities.  If  a such corporeal  unit  associated  with  brown  colour,  that  corporeal  unit  can  be  distinguished (discriminated) and recognized as brown corporeal unit. If it is associated with yellow colour, that corporeal unit can be discriminated as yellow unit. Similarly, if it is associated with good scent,  the  smell  is  good,  if  it  is  associated  with  bad  scent,  the  smell  is  bad  etc.  Thus discrimination and recognition occur in knowledge. In any kind of corporeal unit, the four great elements are fundamental matrix and the brown or yellow colour, the good or bad smell are only derivatives of those four great elements. 

The cloth is similar to the four great elements. Brown colour, yellow colour, good scent  and  bad  scent  etc.  which  are  depending  up  on  the  cloth,  are  similar  to  derived corporeality called colour, smell etc., which are depending up on the four great elements. Thus the four great elements within one corporeal unit are discriminated and recognized by derived  corporealities  of  same  corporeal  unit.   Alternatively,  derived  corporealities  are discriminated  and  recognized by  the  four  great  elements  due  to  lack  of  other  four  great elements of external ones. 

Due to presence of sun shine, shades of house, tree etc., appear on the ground. The shade produced by sun shine discriminates each other reciprocally. When it is sunny day, if any patch of the ground is observed, it can be known easily the fact that ‘this is sun shine, this is shade’. In order to distinguish like this, the sun shine and shades are discriminated by each other  reciprocally.  Similarly,  the  four  great  elements  are  discriminated  by  derived corporealities, and vice versa. The four great elements are similar to sunshine while, derived corporealities to shades of house, tree etc…. 

**PAGE-630** 

Derived corporealities are caused by the four great elements. Depending upon the four great  elements  within  a  such  corporeal  unit,  colour,  smell,  taste…  etc.,  called  derived corporealities occur in that corporeal units. In order to know and see correctly the four great elements within a corporeal unit, it is essential to see that corporeal unit firstly and to analyze the four great elements secondly. In order to see corporeal units, it is essential to see the colour of that corporealunits. Then there is no corporeal unit without colour, smell, taste etc…. Indeed, the corporeal units are a group consisting ultimate nature of corporealities, i.e., at least 8 factors, and 9 factors or 10 factors in some. Therefore, the four great elements are unable to occur in the absence of derived corporealities and vice versa. Therefore the four great elements and   derived corporealities within same corporeal unit are dependent on each other  by  means  of  compatibility,  mutually  and  the  support  condition.  The  conditioned ***dhamma***  and  the  causative  (conditional)  ***dhamma***  are  able  to  discriminate  each  other mutually. It means the fact that ‘there is no conditioned ***dhamma*** without causative ***dhamma*** and vice versa’. ***(Abhi-A-2-241, Mūlaṭī-2-154, Anuṭī-2-156)***. 

42. **Way of discerning on derived corporealities**  
1. Colour (***vaņņa***) 

It must be continued to discern derived corporealities after the four great elements of transparent  and  non-transparent  corporealities  situating  in  6  sense  doors  are  successfully discerned by insight. Every corporeal unit always has the specific colour and various colour can  be  seen  in  various  kinds  of  corporeal  units.  Both  transparent  and  non-transparent corporeal units must be discerned alternatively in 6 sense doors. 

2. Smell (***ghandha***) 

Every corporeal unit contains either good or bad smell. That smell must be scrutinized continuously by insight. If it is not clear in knowledge, the four great elements must be emphasized  inside  the  nose.  When  the  power  of  concentration  becomes  strong,  many transparent corporeal units can be found inside the nose. Now the ***meditator*** is able to discern the life-continuum and then he must keep in mind both the life-continuum and the nose clear sensitivity simultaneously. Both two kinds will appear in knowledge simultaneously. The smell  is  deserving  to  know  by  smelling  consciousness  (***ghānaviññāņa***)  and  mind-door consciousness (***manoviññeya***) and then both the nose clear sensitivity which is depended by smelling  consciousness,  and  the  life-continuum  which  is  depended  by  the  mind-door consciousness, simultaneously. 

**PAGE-631** 

Generally,  all  beings  usually  feel  the  object  of  smell  by  mind  and  mental concomitants of nose-door thought process and mind and mental concomitants of mind-door thought process which is also able to take object of smell. Those consciousness of thought processes  are  depending  upon  nose  clear  sensitivity  and  the  life-continuum  respectively. Therefore those two kinds of clear elements (nose clear sensitivity and the life-continuum) are intended to discern simultaneously and the object of smell can be known systematically by means of both two consciousness of two thought processes.  

When both two kinds of clear elements appear in knowledge simultaneously a group of corporeal units or any one of corporeal unit of which the smell are intended to know, must be emphasized. Then the object of smell of those corporeal units or any one of corporeal unit can be know apparently. If it is not successful to discern the object of smell in this way, it must be discerned continuously on the four great elements of those corporeal unit. When the nature of the four great elements consisting in those corporeal units are very apparent, a kind of  derived  corporealities,  the  smell,  will  become  apparent  in  knowledge  successively. Similarly it must be discerned on the smell of both transparent and non-transparent corporeal units situating in 6 sense doors. If it is successful to discern like this frequently, it can be discerned by only mind and mental concomitants of mind-door thought process of ***vipassanā*** practice without the help of smelling consciousness. (The evidence of this fact can be found volume 2, Meditation on Mentality.) 

3. Taste (***rasa***) 

After  the  smell  of  corporeal  units  are  discerned  successfully,  the  taste  must  be continued. Every kind of corporeal unit consists of any one of 6 kinds of tastes, i.e., sweet, sour,  salt,  hot,  acrid, bitter.  Previously  taste  of  one  corporeal  unit  must be  discerned by consciousness of the  mind-door thought process alone. If it is not successful, it must be emphasized on the four great elements of tongue in order to see corporeal units with tongue clear sensitivity. Then both tongue clear sensitivity and the life-continuum must be kept in mind simultaneously. The object of taste is deserving to know by tasting consciousness and mind-door  consciousness  and  therefore  clear  elements,  which  are  depended  by  those consciousness, are discerned simultaneously. Tasting consciousness occurs depending upon tongue  clear  sensitivity.  The  mind-door  consciousness  occurs  depending  upon  the  life- continuum and both two kinds (mind-door consciousness and life-continuum) depend upon ***hadaya*** ***vatthu*** (physical base of the mind). After both two kinds of clear elements are kept in mind simultaneously, if taste of saliva on the tongue is emphasized to take as object, it can be known apparently by insight. Then taste of both transparent and non-transparent corporeal units situating in 6 sense doors must be discerned alternatively. 

**PAGE-632** 

When efficiency of the mind of meditation becomes strong, the object of colour, smell and taste can be known by only the consciousness of mind-door thought process of ***vipassanā*** practice. 

***sabbopi panesa pabedo manodvārikajavaneyeva labbhati (Abhi-Com-2-388)*** 

Thus it must be recognized the fact that before power of mind of meditation become strong, it is intended to be clear for the object of smell and taste, and then the smelling consciousness and tasting consciousness are discerned simultaneously. If it is not successful yet, the four great elements consisting in corporeal units must be scrutinized repeatedly and frequently.  The  object  of  taste,  which  is  belongs  to  derived  corporealities,  will  become apparent gradually. 

4. **Nutriment (*ojā*)** 

This nutriment is called ***mano viññeya*** ***dhamma***, which is known by only mind-door consciousness.  It  is  a  kind  of  derived  corporeality  which  is  difficult  to  understand  for ***meditators***. Among derived corporealities which are difficult to understand in knowledge, the nutriment,  life-faculty  (***jhīvita***)  and  sex-corporeality  (***bhāvarūpa***)  are  included  for  most ***meditators***. 

After  discerning  on  7th  corporeality  (up  to  taste)  of  both  transparent  and  non- transparent corporeal units are successful, the nutriment, consisting in all corporeal units must be discerned continuously. There are four kinds of nutriments, i.e. the nutriment produced by ***kamma*** (***kammajaojā***), the nutriment produced by mind (***cittajaojā***), the nutriment produced by temperature (***utujaojā***) and the nutriment produced by nutriment (***āhārajaojā***). However, in this stage, it must be discerned on nutriments of transparent and non-transparent corporeal units only. Later it must be analyzed on both four kinds of nutriments separately. 

It must be scrutinized inside any kind of corporeal unit continuously. The essence called nutriment can be found like fatty substance on the surface of water in some ***meditators***. For some ***meditators*** it seems to be yolk sac in the centre of egg or pollen-like structure in the centre of corporeal unit. Evidence of the presence of nutriment can be seen a condition that this essence is able to produce new corporeal units continuously. The corporeal units of new generation are not nutriment but the cause of those corporeal units is nutriment of previous one indeed. (It can be found way of production of new corporeal units from that nutriment in later.) 

These  8  kinds  of  nature  of  corporealities,  the  earth-element,  water-element,  fire- element, air-element, colour, smell, taste and nutriment, are fundamental factors of every corporeal unit. These corporealities are inseparable to each other and called ***avinibbhoga*** ***rūpa*** (inseparable corporealities). Any kind of corporeal unit can be occurred in the presence of at least these 8 factors of corporeality. Although these 8 kinds of nature of corporealities are in separable to each other, the specific character of each corporeality are discriminated in the knowledge of ***meditator*** respectively. It is essential to differentiate various kinds of nature of corporealities within same corporeal unit by analytical knowledge. If it is not successful to discern each nature of corporeality clearly, develop concentration up to the fourth absorption by the mindfulness of breathing. When the light produced by concentration becomes bright, those 8 kinds of nature of corporealities must be scrutinized again in both transparent and non-transparent corporeal units. It will be successful. 

**PAGE-633** 

5. **Life-faculty (*jhīvita*)** 

Previously, 8 kinds of nature, from the earth-element to nutriment, must be discerned in transparent corporeal unit only repeatedly. Within transparent corporeal unit, the ***meditator*** has  seen  the  nature  of  clear  sensitivity  by  insight  previously.  Nine  kinds  of  nature  of corporeality, therefore, are differentiated in transparent corporeal unit which always has 10 factors  of  corporeality.  The  remaining  factor  is  the  life-faculty  called  ***jhīvita***  for  every transparent corporeal unit. Thus every transparent corporeal unit consists of 10 factors, i.e., the earth-element, water-element, fire-element, air-element, colour, smell, taste, nutriment, life-faculty and clear sensitivity (***pssāda*** ***rūpa***). 

***Jhīvita*** is known as the “life” and it is the nature of living condition. When a such transparent  corporeal  unit  produced  by  ***kamma***  is  scrutinized,  the  ***meditator***  usually recognizes the living nature of that unit. That living nature of corporeality, life-faculty has the characteristic  of  protection  to  remaining  9  factors  of  same  corporeal  unit  produced  by ***kamma***. It is the nature of protection for corporealities of the same corporeal unit produced by ***kamma*** from the arising stage (***uppāda***) to the perishing stage (***bhańga***). 

The life-faculty can be found only corporeal units produced by ***kamma***. ***Kammajaū*** are  produced  by  ***kamma***  (action)  of  previous  life  with  the  result  that  the  mother  called ***kamma*** and the offsprings called ***kammajarūpa*** (corporeaities produced by ***kamma***) CPK are separated by different lives. ***Kammajarūpa*** (CPK) are similar to orphans. As an orphan is protected by any other person in order to sustain life, ***kammajarūpa*** (CPK) are protected by the life-faculty from arising stage to perishing stage. The life-faculty, therefore, is called a protective element for ***kammajarūpa*** (CPK) of the same corporeal unit. The ***meditator*** must be able to discern that protective nature of life-faculty within transparent and some non- transparent corporeal units which are produced by ***kamma***. 

Because the transparent corporeal units are certainly produced by ***kamma*** and consist of the life-faculty, the nature of protection, life-faculty, must be scrutinized previously in those units. If it is not clear in knowledge, develop concentration up to the fourth absorption by mindfulness of breathing. When the power of light produced by concentration becomes strong,  the  life-faculty  must  be  scrutinized  inside  the  transparent  corporeal  unit,  but  not outside that unit. If it is able to see the living nature or protective nature of corporealities produced by ***kamma*** within same corporeal unit, it is successful to discern the life-faculty. 

**PAGE-634** 

Very important point is the fact that the life-faculty protects ***kammajarūpa*** (CPK) of the same corporeal unit only but not on different ones. Then the life-faculty is also a kind of corporeality  produced  by  ***kamma***  and  it  is  achieved  to  protect  itself  by  protecting  other corporealities of the same corporeal unit. It should be recognized the fact that it is similar to the duty of bodyguard by which protects senior officer and himself simultaneously. When ***kammajarūpa*** (CPK) of the same corporeal unit are perishing away, the life-faculty is also perishing away simultaneously, due to finish it’s duty of protection. It should be recognized the fact that it is similar to duty of bodyguards by which protect the meeting of senior officers and when the meeting is finished, the duty of bodyguards is also finished simultaneously. If it is successful to discern the life-faculty of a transparent corporeal unit, it must be discerned similarly on every transparent corporeal units situating in 6 sense doors. Then it must be scrutinized within non-transparent corporeal units continuously. Non-transparetn corporeal units  consisting  life-faculty  are  vital  nonad  with  life-faculty  (***jhīvitanavakakalāpa***),  sex- decad with sex-corporeality (***bhavadasakakalāpa***), which two kinds are spreading throughout body, and base-decad (***hadayadasakakalāpa***). Corporeal units produced by mind, corporeal units produced by temperature and corporeal units produced by nutriment are non-transparent units with no life-faculty. 

6. **Sex corporeality (*bhāvarūpa*)** 

Gentleman ***meditator***  has  virility  called purisa  ***bhāvarūpa***  (male  sex  corporeality) which is the cause to recognize as male. Lady ***meditator*** has femininity called ***itthibhāvarūpa*** (female sex corporeality) which is the cause to recognize as female. Some persons who have both virility and femininity are called ***ubato byañjhana*** (hermaphrodite. Those persons must be exceptional case. However hermaphrodite has only one kind of sex corporeality for one period alternatively depending on ***kamma***. (***Abhi-Com-1-359***) 

The  base-decad  (***hadaya***  ***dasakakalāpa***),  sex-decad  (***bhāvadasaka***  ***kalāpa***),  vital- nonad  (***jhīvitanavaka***  ***kalāpa***),  pure-octad  produced  by  mind  (***cittaja***  ***aṭṭhakalāpa***),  pure- octad produced by temperature (***utuja*** ***aṭṭhakalāpa***) and pure-octad produced by nutriment (***āhārajaaṭṭhakalāpa***) are non-transparent corporeal units due to lack of clear sensitivities. 

The sex-decad consisting sex corporeality belongs to non-transparent corporeal units and then the ***meditator*** who wants to discern sex corporeality must scrutinize the life-faculty within non-transparent group previously. If the life-faculty is absent in that non-transparent one, the sex-corporeality is unable to present in it. However, every non-transparent corporeal unit with life-faculty not always consists of sex-corporeality. Vita-nonad with 9th factor called life-faculty is also non-transparent one.  

**PAGE-635** 

Therefore it can be found 9 kinds of nature of corporeality up to the life-faculty in some non- transparent corporeal units, and the 10th factor, sex corporeality may or may not be found in 

those  units.  The  corporeal  unit  with  sex  corporeality  is  called  sex-decad (***bhāvadasakakalāpa***) while remaining non-transparent corporeal units with the life-faculty are either vital nonads or base-decads. 

The male sex corporeality or virility is the sign of recognition as male. Because of presence of this recognition mark, he becomes male. During discerning on the virility by insight, it will usually be understood manly behaviour which is caused by virility in him. Most ***meditators*** usually understand the fact that the virility is different from the nature of roughness of the earth-element. 

The female sex corporeality or femininity is the sign of recognition as female. It must be discerned on the fact that she becomes female because of presence of this recognition mark. During discerning on the femininity by insight, it will usually be understood feminine behaviour which is caused by femininity in her. Most ***meditators*** usually understand the fact that the femininity is different from the nature of softness of the earth-element. 

The gentleman ***meditator*** is able to discern only virility internally (in himself). The lady ***meditator*** is able to discern only femininity internally (in herself). Either gentleman or lady ***meditator*** is able to discern both virility and femininity externally. 

If it is not satisfied to discern the sex corporeality, develop concentration again by mindfulness of breathing. When power of light produced by concentration becomes bright, it must be scrutinized on the sex corporeality again. It will be understood not soon later. 

When it is successful to discern the sex corporeality both internally and externally it must be discerned on the sex corporeality consisting in sex-decad which are situating in 6 sense doors respectively. According to the Buddha’s ***Abhidhamma***, sex decades with 10th factor of sex corporeality are present in all 6 sense doors. Differences between eyes, faces, shapes of hands and legs etc. of male and female are caused by different sex corporeality. Thus the different sex corporeality is able to differentiate between male and female in order to know the fact that “this person is male, this person is female”. It should, therefore, be recognize the sex corporeality is a kind of derived corporeality spreading throughout body. There are 10 kinds of nature of corporeality in sex decad, i.e., the earth-element, the water- element, the fire-element, the air-element, colour, smell, taste, nutriment, life-faculty, sex corporeality.  The  ***meditator***  must  scrutinizes  and  keeps  in  mind  those  specific  nature  of corporealities of sex decad by analytical knowledge. 

**PAGE-636** 

Thus if it is successful to discern 10 kinds of nature of both transparent and non- transparent corporeal units, situating in all 6 sense doors by analytical knowledge in order to reach the field of the ultimate reality, it is able to continue to discern again among transparent corporeal units.  In this  case, the non-transparent corporeal units  are referred to only sex decades with 10th factor of sex corporeality. The base decad is also non-transparent one with 10th factor of physical base of mind (***hadaya*** ***vatthu***). Way of discerning on the physical base of mind is as follows. 

7. **Physical base of mind (*hadaya* *vatthu*)** 

***manodhātumanodhātu viññāņam nissayalakkhaņam hadaya vatthu. (Visuddhi-2-77)*** 

- the nature of corporeality,on which the mind-element (***manodhātu***) and the consciousness of thought processes (***manoviññāņadhātu***) occur as dependence, is called the physical base of mind (***hadaya*** ***vatthu***). (***Visuddhi***-2-77) 

***ittha pana manoti bhavańgacittam. (Sam-Com-3-5)*** 

According to preaching methodology of ***suttana***, the mind-element (***manodhātu***) is the  clear  life-continuum.  It  occurs  depending  up  on  the  physical  base  of  mind  (***hadaya*** ***vatthu***).  All  consciousness  of  thought  processes,  except  penta-consciousness  (***panca viññāņa***), i.e., seeing-consciousness, hearing-consciousness, smelling-consciousness, tasting- consciousness,  tactile  (touching)-consciousness,  are  called  the  consciousness  of  thought processes 

256 

(***manoviññāņadhātu***). Those consciousness of thought processes occur depending up on the physical base of mind in the realm of five –aggregates (***panca*** ***vokāra*** ***bhumi***). The seeing- consciousness  occurs  depending  up  on  the  eye-clear-sensitivity  while  the  hearing- consciousness, on ear-clear-sensitivity; the smelling-consciousness, on nose-clear-sensitivity, the  tasting-consciousness,  on  tongue-clear-sensitivity,  the  tactile-consciousness,  on  body- clear-sensitivity, respectively. Therefore, the physical base of mind (***hadaya*** ***vatthu***) means the nature of corporeality which is dependent factor of consciousness called ***manodhātu*** (life- continuum)  and  ***manoviññāņadhātu***  (all  consciousness  of  thought  processes  (***vīthi  citta***), except penta-consciousness (***panca*** ***viññāņa***). 

In this stage, it is able to find the life-continuum for a ***meditator*** who had discerned thoroughly on 10 kinds of nature of corporealities consisting in each transparent and non- transparent corporeal units at 6 sense doors. The host consciousness called ***bhāvańga*** mind clearness or the life-continuum is very clear and brilliant bright. (***Ang-1-9***). All kinds of consciousness  of  meditation,  ***samatha***  and  ***vipassanā***  practices,  are  also  very  clear  and brilliant bright. (***Ang-1-258***). Therefore the mind of meditation which is able to reach the field of ultimate corporeality, called ***rūpapariggaha ñāņa*** (discriminative knowledge on the corporeality) is very clear and brilliant bright, now indeed. 

**PAGE-637** 

For a ***meditator*** who is discerning on the nature of corporealities consisting in various corporeal units of 6 sense doors, the brilliant bright life-continuum and consciousness of thought processes will be found inside the heart. If it is not understood on those kinds of consciousness  easily,  it  must  be  emphasized  in  the  heart  and  taken  to  heart  the  life- continuum. Then it must be taken the object of forefinger which is bent and stretched out alternatively. It must be emphasized only on the mind-door but not on fore-finger. It can be found  the  consciousness  which  is  capable  to  bend  and  stretch  out  forefinger  by  insight knowledge.  The  ***meditator***  who  is  able  to  see  the  life-continuum  and  consciousness  of thought processes, must scrutinizes the fact that “which is the dependence of these mind”. It must be discerned on the physical base of mind in order to understand it’s nature of depended factor of mind. 

Corporeal units consisting physical base of mind (***hadaya*** ***vatthu***) are non-transparent and these situate at the base of the life-continuum (***bhavańga***) which are the most frequently occurring  along  with  the  life.  It  must be  discerned  frequently  on  occurrence  of  the  life- continuum and consciousness of thought processes depending up on the physical base of mind, consisting in the base-decad (***hadaya*** ***dasakakalāpa***). If power of light produced by mind of meditation is very strong, relationship between those mind and physical base of mind will be understood well. After discerning on physical base of mind is successful, it must be discerned on remaining corporealities within same corporeal unit continuously. 

If  it  is  not  successful  to  discern  the physical  base  of  mind,  it  must be  discerned frequently on the nature of the four great elements consisting in non-transparent corporeal units lying under the life-continuum. Then derived corporealities which occurs depending up on the four great elements must be discerned one after another gradually. If 9 kinds of nature of corporealities, i.e., earth-element… same…life-faculty, can be seen by insight, it must be continued to scrutinize the physical base of mind. In the heart, vital-nonads and sex-decads are also present. These are also non-transparent corporeal units and containing life-faculty (***jhīvita***) as 9th factor. Therefore, if a such non-transparent corporeal unit with 10 factors can be discerned up to the life-faculty, the physical base of mind can be found in that corporeal unit,  unless  it  is  vital-nonad  and  sex-decad.  Indeed,  the  physical  base  of  mind  called ***hadayavatthu***  is  the  nature  of  dependence  of  the  life-continuum  (***bhavańga***)  and consciousness  of  thought processes  (***manoviññāņadhātu***)  in  the  realm  of  five-aggregates (***pancavokārabhumi***). 

**PAGE-638** 

43. **Various kind of corporeal units in (6) sense doors *Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-259)*** 

According  to  explanations  found  in  ***Visuddhimagga***  ***aṭṭhakathā***,  various  kinds  of corporealities and corporeal units are as follows. 

1. In  eye-door  (***cakkhu***  ***dvāra***),  there  are  6  kinds  of  corporeal  units,  i.e.,  eye-decad (***cakkhu***  ***dasakakalāpa***),  body-decad  (***kāyadasaka***  ***kalāpa***),  sex-decad (***bhāvadasakakalāpa***), pure-octad produced by mind (***cittaja***-***aṭṭhakalāpa***), pure-octad produced  by  temperature  (***utujaaṭṭhakalāpa***),  pure-octad  produced  by  nutriment (***āhārajhaaṭṭhakalāpa***) and 54 kinds of corporealities. 
1. In  ear-door  (***sota  dvāra***),  there  are  6  kinds  of  corporeal  units,  i.e.,  ear-decad (***sotadasakakalāpa***), body-decad……s………. and 54 kinds of corporealities. 
1. In  nose-door  (***ghānadvāra***),  there  are  6  kinds  of  corporeal  units,  i.e.,  nose-decad (***ghānadasakakalāpa***), body-decad,………..s………. and 54 kinds of corporealities. 
1. In tongue-door (***jhiñhvādvāra***), there are 6 kinds of corporeal units, i.e., tongue-decad (***jhiñhvādasakakalāpa***), body-decad………s…….. and 54 kinds of corporealities. 
1. In body-door (***kāyadvāra***), there are 5 kinds of corporeal units, i.e., body-decad, sex- decad, …….s……….. and 44 kinds of corporealities. 
1. In mind-door or heart (***manodvāra***), there are 6 kinds of corporeal units, i.e., base- decad  (***hadayadasakakalāpa***),  body-decad,  ……..s…………  and  54  kinds  of corporealities, respectively. 

In this case, there are only 6 kinds, 5 kinds of corporeal unit and only 54 kinds, 44 kinds of corporealities etc… in each door qualitatively. However, there are so many corporeal units in each door quantitatively. 

For  instance,  there  are  many  eye-decads,  body-decads,  sex-decads,  etc..  in  the  eye  door quantitatively but kinds of corporeal units are limited numbers in qualitatively. Thus it should be understood remaining doors similarly. 

Some ***meditators***  who  car  well-informed  in  the  Supreme  Doctrine  of  the  Buddha (Buddha ***Abhidhamma***) can understand well when they heard how many kinds of corporeal units and corporealities present in eye qualitatively etc.. They are able to understand way of practice after only once teaching. 

**PAGE-639** 

However, some ***meditators***, who are not well-informed the Supreme Doctrine of the Buddha, cannot understand easily on explanations like this. They are unable to discern and keep in mind the ultimate nature of corporealities by merely explained in this way. For those persons, the following tables of various kinds of corporeal units and corporealities for 6 sense doors are presented. These tables are intended to be clear for only ***meditators*** who live in countryside and they are not well-informed in scriptures. These may not be essential for sharp wisdom ***meditators***, indeed. 

**PAGE-640** 

**Table (1) Structural constituents of the eye (*cakkhu* *dvāra*), (54) kinds of corporealities** 



|1. eye-decad |2. body-decad |3. sex-decad |4. pure octad produced by mind |5. pure octad produced by temperature  |6. pure octad produced by nutriment |
| - | - | - | :- | :- | :- |
|1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |
|2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |
|3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |
|4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |
|5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |
|6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |
|7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |
|8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |
|9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty ||||
|10. eye-clear sensitivity |10. body- clear sensitivity |10. sex-corporeality ||||
|Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** non-transparent |Produced by mind non-transparent |Produced by temperature non- transparent |Produced by nutriment non-transparent |


1. eye-decad  = (transparent) corporeal unit containing eye-clear sensitivity as 10th factor, which is deserving to strike together with colour. 
1. body-decad = (transparent) corporeal unit containing body-clear sensitivity as 10th factor, which is deserving to strike together with tactile objects (earth-, fire- and air-elements) 
1. sex-decad  = (non-transparent) corporeal unit, containing sex corporeality as 10th factor. 
1. pure octad produced by mind = (non-transparent) corporeal unit, containing nutriment as 8th factor. 
1. pure octad produced by temperature = (non-transparent) corporeal unit, containing nutriment as 8th factor; it is produced by fire-element (= temperature) within a corporeal unit. 
1. pure octad produced by nutriment = (non-transparent) corporeal unit, containing nutriment as 8th factor 

Note: These (54) kinds of corporealities are known as ***sadambhāra*** ***cakkhu*** (structural constituents of eye) while the eye-clear sensitivity (***cakkhu*** ***pssāda***), also known as ***pssāda*** ***cakkhu*** (functional constituent of eye). 

**Table (2) Structural constituents of the ear (*sotadvāra*), (54) kinds of corporealities** 



|1. ear-decad |2. body-decad |3. sex-decad |4. pure octad produced by mind |5. pure octad produced by temperature  |6. pure octad produced by nutriment |
| - | - | - | :- | :- | :- |
|1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |
|2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |
|3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |
|4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |
|5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |
|6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |
|7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |
|8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |
|9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty ||||
|10. ear-clear sensitivity |10. body- clear sensitivity |10. sex-corporeality ||||
|Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** non-transparent |Produced by mind non-transparent |Produced by temperature non- transparent |Produced by nutriment non-transparent |
\1.  ear-decad = (transparent) corporeal unit containing ear-clear sensitivity as 10th factor, which is deserving to strike together with sound. 

Notes: These (54) kinds of corporealities are known as ***sasambhāra sota*** (structural constituents of ear) while the ear-clear sensitivity (***sota*** ***pssāda***), also known as ***pssāda*** ***sota*** (functional constituent of ear. The meaning of remaining corporeal units should be recognized as mentioned in eye (***cakkhudvāra***). 
PAGE36 Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \* 

**PAGE-642** 

**Table (3) Structural constituents of the nose (*ghāna* *dvāra*), (54) kinds of corporealities** 



|1. nose-decad |2. body-decad |3. sex-decad |4. pure octad produced by mind |5. pure octad produced by temperature  |6. pure octad produced by nutriment |
| - | - | - | :- | :- | :- |
|1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |
|2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |
|3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |
|4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |
|5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |
|6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |
|7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |
|8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |
|9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty ||||
|10. nose-clear sensitivity |10. body- clear sensitivity |10. sex-corporeality ||||
|Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** non-transparent |Produced by mind non-transparent |Produced by temperature non- transparent |Produced by nutriment non-transparent |
\1.  nose-decad = (transparent) corporeal unit containing nose-clear sensitivity as 10th factor, which is deserving to strike together with smell. 

Notes:  These (54) kinds of corporealities are known as ***sasambhāra ghāna*** (structural constituents of nose) while the nose-clear sensitivity (***ghāna*** ***pssāda***), also known as ***pssāda*** ***ghāna***(functional constituent of nose). The meaning of remaining corporeal units should be recognized as mentioned in eye (***cakkhudvāra***). 
PAGE36

**Table (4) Structural constituents of the tongue *(jhihvā* *dvāra*), (54) kinds of corporealities** 



|1. tongue-decad |2. body-decad |3. sex-decad |4. pure octad produced by mind |5. pure octad produced by temperature  |6. pure octad produced by nutriment |
| - | - | - | :- | :- | :- |
|1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |
|2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |
|3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |
|4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |
|5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |
|6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |
|7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |
|8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |
|9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty ||||
|10. tongue-clear sensitivity |10. body- clear sensitivity |10. sex-corporeality ||||
|Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** non-transparent |Produced by mind non-transparent |Produced by temperature non- transparent |Produced by nutriment non-transparent |
\1.  tongue-decad = (transparent) corporeal unit containing tongue-clear sensitivity as 10th factor, which is deserving to strike together with taste. 

Notes:  These (54) kinds of corporealities are known as ***sasambhāra jhihvā*** (structural constituents of tongue) while the tongue-clear sensitivity (***jhihvā*** ***pssāda***), also known as ***pssāda*** ***jhihvā*** (functional constituent of tongue). The meaning of remaining corporeal units should be recognized as mentioned in eye (***cakkhudvāra***). 
PAGE38 Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \* 

**PAGE-644** 

**Table (5) Structural constituents of the body (*kāyadvāra*), (44) kinds of corporealities** 



|1. body-decad |2. sex-decad |3. pure octad produced by mind |4. pure octad produced by temperature  |5. pure octad produced by nutriment |
| - | - | :- | :- | :- |
|1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |
|2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |
|3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |
|4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |
|5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |
|6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |
|7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |
|8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |
|9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty ||||
|10. body- clear sensitivity |10. sex-corporeality ||||
|Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** non-transparent |Produced by mind non-transparent |Produced by temperature non- transparent |Produced by nutriment non-transparent |
Notes: These (44) kinds of corporealities are known as ***sasambhārakāya*** (structural constituents of body) while the body-clear sensitivity (***kāyapssāda***), also known as ***pssādakāya*** (functional constituent of body). In detailed account of the four elements meditation, (42) bodily parts means the fact that it is the way of analytical discerning on corporealities found in body which is divided into (42) parts again. Therefore, if the number  of  kinds  of  corporealities  of  some  bodily  parts  is  counted  as  (44),  it  should  be  recognized  that  it  refers  to  these  (44)  kinds  of corporealities. 
PAGE38

**Table (6) Structural constituents of the heart (*manodvāra*), (54) kinds of corporealities** 



|base-decad |2. body-decad |3. sex-decad |4. pure octad produced by mind |5. pure octad produced by temperature  |6. pure octad produced by nutriment |
| - | - | - | :- | :- | :- |
|1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |1. earth-element |
|2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |2.water-element |
|3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |3.fire-element |
|4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |4.air-element |
|5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |5. colour |
|6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |6. smell |
|7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |7. taste |
|8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |8. nutriment |
|9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty |9. life-faculty ||||
|10. physical base of mind |10. body- clear sensitivity |10. sex-corporeality ||||
|Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** transparent |Produced by ***kamma*** non-transparent |Produced by mind non-transparent |Produced by temperature non- transparent |Produced by nutriment non-transparent |
\1.  base-decad = (non-transparent) corporeal unit containing physical base of mind (***hadaya*** ***vatthu***), as 10th factor which is dependence of ***manodhātu*** (life-continuum) and ***manoviññāņadhātu***. 

Notes: These (54) kinds of corporealities are known as ***sasambhāra*** ***hadaya*** (structural constituents of heart) while physical base of mind (***hadarūpa***), also known as ***hadaya*** ***vatthu*** (functional constituent of heart) 
PAGE39 Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \* 

PAGE39



