PAGE118

*atthîti sassatadithi uppajjeya*, *sâ hotîti ayappamattha attho* (*Sam*.-*Tha*.-2: 31). 

`   `***Aparappaccayâ**ti na aparappaccayena*, *aññassa apattiyâyetvâ attapaccekkhañâname- vassa ettha hotîti*.  ***Ettâvatâ kho kiccâna sammâditthi hotî**ti evum sattasaññâya pahînattâ etthakena sammâdassanam nâma hotîti missakasammâditthiñ âha* (*Sam*.-*Tha*.- 2: 32). 

***Ayampî**ti na kevalam khanato udayavayanîharananayo*, *atha kho paccayato udayavaya- nîharanayopi*  (*Sam*.-*Tha*.-2: 37). 

***Na parappaccayenâ**ti parassa asaddahanena*.  ***Missakalmmâditthiñ âhâra**ti nâma-rûpa- paricchedato patthâya sammâditthâyâ vuttattâ lokiyalokuttaramissakam sammâditthiñ  avoca* (*Sam*.-*Tha*.-2: 38).* 

*Kiccâna* .... All the santient beings mostly are clinging to the fact that (the belief that self always remains as self) one's form is everlasting, and that (self has a limit) there  is a time when self exists not any more ( a view called *sassatadittihi ucchedaditthti*). 

*Kiccâna* .... He who sees, by *vipassanâ ñâna* and *magga ñâna*, the nature of the cause of arising and of resultant formation in its true perspective of the *sankhâra loka*,  there does occur such a thing as non-existance in such a person (a clinging to the belief  that the self lost its existance one the living being died). 

*Kiccâna* .... In *sankhâra dhammas* the clinging such as "mine, mine", attachment by craving = *tahnupaya*, attachment to the view of "the assume I" = *ditthupaya*, strong attachment = *upâdana* (clinging), deep rootedness = *abhinivesa* (adherence to one's  belief) factors mostly wrapped the santeint beings around. 

This Noble One, my disciple, do not adhere to, clings to nor cultivate in his citta  these adherence = *upaya*, the strong clinging = *upâdan*, as the the assume I.  

He  does  not  have  wrong  belief  nor  wrong  thought  such  as  "***Dukkhameva uppajjamânam uppajjati*, *dukkham nirujjhamânam nirujjhati =* If something formed, it the suffering that is formed, if cessation occurs, then it is the dukkha which does   cease".**    

***Aparapaccayâ ñâmamevassa ettha hoti** =* This disciple does not depend upon others to have acquired such belief. He knows by him self by virtue of the ***Attapaccekkha ñâna*.**  *Kiccâna* ....** This much will suffice to have the right view = *sammâditthi*  

(*Sam*.-1: 257-258). 

***Lokasamudaya*** — ***Lokanirodha*** 

Arising and Cessation of Mundane 

Formation of *sankhâra* due to *avijjâ* and of *viññâna* due to *sankhâra* called the process of formation of called the mundane *sankhâra* = *anulomapaccayâkâra* = *anuloma*- *paticca* *samuppâda dhamma* is called ***Lokasamudaya***.  *Nibbattilakkhanâ* called *upâda* (arising) of the characters of the *paticca samuppâda*, such as *avijjâ*, *sankhâra* - etc. is  also called the ***Lokasamudaya***. 

Absolute dissolution (by way of *asesavirâga* and *anuppâdanirodha*) of *avijjâ* is due to *arahattamagga*.  Because of this dissolution, by means of the non-reappearing cessation, the resultant *sankhâra* ceases (by way of *asesavirâga* and *anuppâdanirodha*) completely by non-reappearing cessation which is the process of dissolution of *sankhâra* 

- *patilomapaccayâkâra dhamma* = *patilomapaticca samuppâda dhamma* is also referrd to as ***Lokanirodha***.  The dissolution of *avijjâ*, *sankhâra*, etc., which are the characters of *paticca samuppâda*  and which are subject to change called *viparinâma lakkhanâ*, are  also termed ***Lokanirodha***.   

If stated with reference to Patisambhidâ Pâli, *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâra*, *kamma dhammas* etc. for which *sanmudaya saccâ dhamma* as their cause clearly arises = clearly present.  Due to this the cause *viññâna*, *nâma*-*rûpa*, *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedana* etc. referred to as the resultant five clinging aggregates, the  *dukkha saccâ* (the truth of  suffering), has clearly formed.  These are all called the ***Lokasamudaya***. 

*Avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana*, *sankhâra*, *kamma* etc., with *samudaya saccâ* *dhammas* as the cause, ceased absolutely because of the *arahattamagga* (via the *asesavirâga*, *anuppâ- danirodha*), by means of a non-reappearable dissolution.  Due to such a cessation the resultant *viññâna*, *nâma*-*rûpa*, *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedana* etc. called the five clinging aggregates which are the truth of suffering ceased (via the *asesavirâga*, *anuppâdaniro- dha*) through a process of non-reappearable cessation, are also called ***Lokanirodha*.**  The dissolution of the five clinging (or dissolution of the cause and consequences) by means  of *viparinâma lakkhanâ* is also the ***Lokanirodha*.**   

When the noble disciple, the follower of the Buddha, discerns on the formation and process of formation, of cessation and its process by *vipassanâsammâditthi ñâna*, he  would know that — 

***Dukkhameva uppajjamânam uppajjati*, *dukkham nirujjhamânam nirujjhati*** = If it arises, then it is the *dukkha* which arises; if it ceases, then it is the *dukkha* which ceases.  In him there is no doubt, no scepticism. 

As explained above *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdana* called the *kilesavatta dhamma* (the factors of recurrent of defilements) are just the *upâdânakkhandhâ* (clinging aggregates).  The *sankhâra* – *kamma*, referred to as *kamma vatta* (recyle of action), are also just the *upâdânakkhandhâ*.  So  are the *viññâna*, *nâma*-*rûpa*, *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedana* etc., which  are  the  *vipâkavatta  dhammas*.    These  *upâdânakkhandhas*  are  —  *sankhittena* *pañcuppâdânakkhandha dukkhâ* (*Dî*.-2:243;  *Ma*.-1: 82; *Ma*.-3: 292; *Abhi*.-2” 105), in accordance with *desanâs*, only the *dukkha dhammas* which are being tortured by the  phenomena of  arising and perishing all the time. 

It is expatiated as “if it arises, it is the *dukkha* which arises; if it ceases, it is the *dukkha*  which  ceases”  and  the  meditator  understands  this  arising  and  the  process  of arising, and ceasing and the process of ceasing  of the *sankhâraloka* by *sammâditthi ñâna* and *maggasammâditthi ñâna*.  In understanding the arising and its process, dissolution and its process of the *dukkha* referred to as *lokasamudaya* and *lokanirodha*, which kind of knowledge is involved, the *paccekkha ñâna* or *anvaya ñâna*?  See the following for the  answer. 

*Aparapaccayâ ñânamevassa ettha hoti* (*Sam*.-2: 32). 

***Aparapaccayâ**ti na parappacayena*, *aññassa apattiyâyetvâ attapaccekkhaññânamevassa  ettha hotîti* (*Sam*.-*Tha*.-2: 32). 

In accordance with the opening of the Pâli text, this is not the kind of knowledge that ends up in individuals who acquired it by words of mouth from his predecessors.  The Buddha expounded that, in fact, “In this case the disciple does not depend on others, he understands it by his self via *attapaccekkha ñâna* (practical knowledge).  Therefore,  this understanding is the knowledge of *attapaccekkha ñâna*. 

In this Suttana, the Buddha has expatiated with reference to the combination of these *lokî* and *lokuttara sammâditthi* which are the *vipassanâsammâditthi* called the *lokî*- *samâditthi* and *lokuttarasammâditthi* called *maggasammâditthi*. 

*Nâma-rûpaparicchedato patthâya sammâditthiyâ vattattâ lokiyalokuttaramissakam  sammâditthim avoca* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 38). 

As the Buddha has sermoned *sammâditthi ñâna* (knowledge of right understan- ding)  starting from *nâmapariccheda ñâna* (knowledge that discerns the corporeality and mentality as two separate groups), the *sammâditthi*, the combined *lokîlokuttara*, has been  said to have indicated in this suttana (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 38). 

This *sammâditthi* is the *catusaccasammâditthi* (the right understanding of 4-fold noble  truth).   These  are  the  right  understanding  of  the  truth  of  suffering,  the  right understanding of the truth of origin of suffering, the right understanding of the truth of the cessartion of suffering, and the right understanding of the truth of Path.  The Buddha has instructed this knowledge of right understanding as ***attapaccekkha ñâna*** in Kiccâna- gutta Suttan.  The same explanation has been given in the Atthakatthâ (book of meaning). That the Buddha has expounded from the *nâma*-*rûpapariccheda ñâna* to *catusaccaditthi*  called the *attapaccekhha ñâna* has again been indicated by the teachers. 

In *Nibbânagâminipati*.*p* *dâ* also, the followings have been written in accordance  with the instructions given by the Buddha’s doctrines, Atthakathâ and Tîkâ. 

1. Concentration  on  corporeality  called  *rûpakkhandhâ*  by  *attapaccekkha  ñâna*  to  discern penetratively until *paramatta* is attained has been described in section on Rûpakammatthâna.  (Vol. I). 
1. Concentration  on  corporeality  called  *rûpakkhandhâ*  by  *attapaccekkha  ñâna*  to  discern penetratively until *paramatta* is attained has been described in section on Nâmakammatthâna. (Vol. II). 
1. The process of origin of *sankhâra loka*, called the *lokasamudaya*, which is the *anulomapaccayâkâra* = *anuloma paticcasamuppâda* *dhammas*, and concentration on these made by *attapaccekkha ñâna* to  discern penetratively until *paramatta* is attained has been described in section on Paticcasamuppâda. (Vol. III). 
1. Culturing of the *sankhâra dhammas* by way of their *lakkhana* (character), *rasa* (taste),  *paccuppatthâna*  (manifestation),  and  *padatthâna*  (proximate  cause)  has been described in section on Paticcasamuppâda. (Vol. IV). 
1. Discerning penetratively of formation and its process, cessation and its process of these lokasamudaya and lokanirodha is has been described in section on Vipassanâ. Especially in Udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna section, they are given under the names ***Samudayadhammânupassî*  Section*,  Vayadhammânupassî*  Section**  and ***Samudayavayadhammânupassî* Section.**  (Vol V). 
6. *Vipassanâ* exercise on the *adittha* past and future *sankhâra* (which do not belong to the present) *anvaya ñâna* has been described in section on Udayabbayânupassanâ. (Vol. VI). 

**What *Anvaya Ñâna* Is** 

Included in the knowledge of *catusaccasammâditthi ñâna* is *dukkha saccâ* named the five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* which are meditated so as to attain *paramatta* which understands  penetratively  by  means  of  *sammâditthi*,  which  understand  the  *samudaya* *saccâ*  penetratively  =  *sammâditthi*  which  penetratively  understands  the  formation  of *dukkha saccâ* because of *samudaya saccâ*.  *Vipassanâ ditthi* penetratively knows the true facts of the impermanence, of the suffering and of arising to a stage of *khanikanirodha* (momentary cessation).   The dissolution of the *samudaya saccâ dhammas* by means of *anuppâdanirodha*  due  to  which  *dukkha  saccâ  dhammas*  cease  by  way  of  *anuppâda- nirodha*  is  understood  penetratively  by  *vipassanâditthi*.   The  discerning  *lokîmagga* *dhamma*  referred  to  as  *vipassanâ  ñâna*  (insight  knowledge);  the  knowledge  of *vipassanâditthi* that penetratively understands the facts of *anicca*, *dukkha* and *anatta* of these  *lokîmagga  dhammas*;  the  *maggasammâditthi*  which*  penetratively  understands *asanñkhata dhâtu*, *nibbâna dhâtu* referred to as *nirodha saccâ* by *ârammanapativedha*; the  knowledge  of  *maggasammâditthi*  that  penetratively  understands  *dukkha  saccâ*, *samudaya saccâ* and *magga saccâ dhammas* by means of *asamohapativedha* etc. are all  sammâditthi  ñâna  and  are  instructed  by  the  Buddha  to  be  ***Aparappaccaya  ñân*. *a  = Attapaccakkha ñân*. *a*.**  The Atthakthâ, Tîkâ also have explained in a similar way.  If so a question arises as to whether or not an ***anvaya**ñâ*.*n* *a* is involved in these *catusaccasammâ*- *ditthi ñân*. *a*.  The following will answer this question. 

***Dha**n**m**iro**m**d**e**h a**ñ**s**â**a**n**cacnet i  dehkaampamtiev eñdâhnaavñacsae*,*n* *yaa tchaâtuhsaa “ctcaatdthhaa mkamtaem ñaâmn*.*a*  *dmh acamtmusea ñccâanbabm*.*h* ,*a* *cnattaûrseu*   

*maggesu catûsu phalesu ñâna”nti* (*Abhi*.-2: 341; .*T* *î*.-*Tha*.-3: 202). 

. 

. 

***Anvaye ñan**anti cattâri saccâni paccekkh*.*a* *to disvâ yathâ idâni*, *evum atîtepi*.*  *anâgatepi imeva pañcakkhandhâ du*.*k* *khasaccam*, *ayameva tahnâ samudaya*.*s* *accam*, *ayameva* 

*nirodho nirodhasaccam*, *ayameva m*.*a* *ggo maggasaccanti evum tassa ñânassa  anugatiyam*.  *ñânam* (*T*. *î*.-*Tha*.-3: 202). 

- . 

***Anvaye ñan**anti anuaye ñânam*, *d*.*h* *ammañ*. *âssa*.* . *a* *nugamane ñânam*, *paccavakkhana- nânassetam nâmam* (*Sam*.-*Tha*.-2: 62).** 

***Dhammañâna*** — *Ariyamagga ñâ*.*n* *a* penetratively knows, taking the *dhamma* of *nibbâna*,  the *nirodha saccâ*, as the object by way of *ârammana pa*.*t* *ivedha* which bears a meaning  as  the  penetrative  knowledge.   By  annihilation  of  *moha*  which  hinders  the understanding of the truths such as *dukkha saccâ*, *samudaya saccâ*, and *magga saccâ*, acquired the penetrative knoweldge by virtue of *asammohapa*.*t* *ivedha*.  *Ariyaphala ñân*. *a* (the  Noble  Fruit  Knowledge)  understands  these,  by  taking  the  *dhamma*  of  *nibbâna*, *nirodha saccâ*, via a penetrative knowledge of *asammohapativedha*.  Seeing and knowing this way, *ariyamagga ñân*. *a* included in the 4-fold *ariyamagga* and the *ariyaphala ñâ*.*n* *a*,  included in the 4-fold *ariyaphala*, are all called the *dhamma ñân*. *a*. 

. 

***Anvaya  ñâna***  —  *Anvaya  ñâna*  sees  the  Four  Noble  Truths  penetratively  and presently via *paccekkha ñâna* (practical knowledge).  In a similar way this knowledge knows  “in  the  past  as  well  as  in  future,  only  these  five  *khandhas*  (5-fold  clinging aggregates) are the *dukkha saccâ*, only the *tahnâ* is the *samudaya saccâ*, only the *nirodha* *nibbâna* noble *dhamma* is the *nirodha saccâ*, and only the eight *maggañ* are the *magga* 

` `*saccâ*.”   

`    `In this way *anvaya ñâna* is the kind of knowledge that always follows the  *dhamma ñâ*.*n* *a* (*T*. *î*.-*Tha*.-3: 202). 

*Anvaya ñân*. *a* is a knowledge which is formed corresponding to *dhamma ñâ*.*n* *a*.  A knowledge which always follows the *dhamma ñâ*.*n* *a*..   The name *anvaya ñâ*.*n* *a* is the name  of ***paccavekkhana ñân*. *a*** (reflective knowledge) (*Sam*.-*T*. *ha*.-2: 62). 

`          `Therefore, note that ***paccavekkhana ñâna*** which arises corresponding to *dhamma ñân*. *a* referred to as the *ariyamagga ñâ*.*n* *a*, *phala ñâ*.*n* *a* = a reviewing knolwedge is called  the ***anvaya ñân*. *a***.  In *lokuttarâcattusaccâsammâditthi ñâ*.*n* *a*, note that *navaya ñâ*.*n* *a* is not included.  This is all about the *anvaya ñân*. *a*, a knowledge that always follows *lokuttarâ ariyamagga ñâ*.*n* *a* and *phala ñâ*.*n* *a*. 

**The *Anvaya Ñâna* that always follows the *Vipassanâ Ñâna*** ***Nâma-rûpaparicchedato pat***.***t*** ***hâya sammâditthiy***.***â***  ***vuttattâ lokiyalokut***.***t*** ***aramissaka***.***m******   

*sammâdi*.*t*.*t* *hi avoca* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.2: 38). 

As explained above by the teacher, the Buddha has preached the *sammâditthi* *ñâna* starting from *nâmaparicche*-*da ñâna* and because of this there also is *anvaya ñâna* which always follows *vipassanâ ñâna* named *lokîcatusaccasammâditthi ñâna*.  As the *anvaya ñâna*, which always follows the *ariyamagga ñâna* and *phala ñâna*, is just only the reflective *paccavekkhana ñâna*, and is not included in *lokuttara catusaccasammâditthi ñâna*.  Similarly *anvaya ñâna*, which always follows the *vipassanâsammâditthi ñâna* referred to as *lokîcatusacca sammâditthi*, is just only a kind of *paccavekhhana ñâna*.  It is not included in *lokî catusaccasammâditthi ñâna*.  It is because *lokî catusaccasammâditthi ñâna* has been described as *aparappaccaya ñâna* by the Buddha in Kiccânagutta Suttana,  and this ***aparappaccaya ñâna*** explained as ***attapaccekkha ñâna*** by atthakathâ. 

See Nibbânagâminipatipadâ Vol. I in sections on Vipassanâ, Udayabbayânupas- sanâ for clarity of the Four Noble Truth during period of *lokîvipassanâ*.  Similarly for discerning on the past and future sankhâra by *anvaya ñâna* which always follows the *vippasanâ sammâditthi ñâna* is given in section on Vipassanâ, Udayabbayânupassanâ, Bhañgânupassanâ. 

***Lokîcatusaccasammâdi*.*t*.*t* *hi*** 

The Buddha has critically analyzed the Eight Maggañ Dhamma in sections on Dhammânupassanâ, Magga saccâ of Mahâsatipatthâ Suttâna.  Among these eight,  Sammâditthi has been classed as four groups. 

*Katamâ ca bhikkave sammâditthi*.  *Yam kho bhikkave dukkhe ñânam*, *dukkha- samudaye ñânam*, *dukkhanirodheñânam*, *dukkhanirodhagâminiyâ ñânam*. *Ayam vuccati*  *bhikkhave sammâditthi* (*Ma*.1: 88). 

Bbikkhus …. What is *sammâditthi*?  Bhikkhus … The following four knowledges  are the *sammâditthi* (*Ma*.1: 88). 

1. The knowledge that recognizes the *dukkha saccâ*. 
1. The knowledge that recognizes the *samudaya saccâ* which is the cause of *dukkha*.  
1. The knowledge that recognizes the *nirodha saccâ* of *dukkha*. 
1. The knowledge that recognizes the *magga saccâ* which is leads to *Nibbâna* where *dukkha*  has  been  eradicated  (the  practice  laeding  to  the  Path  for  attainment  of Nibbâna). 

**Discussion of Early Great Mathera** 

In this *satipatthâna desanâ* the Buddha has discussed on eight-fold maggañ and treated each analytically in the section on *magga saccâ*.  On this fact there had been a discussion, called dhammasâkicchâ among the great matheras.  The discussion on the practice of *satipatthâna* on the eight *maggañ* classes  in Mahâsatipatthâna Suttana was 

` `focussed upon as to whether 

1. Pubbâsatipathânamagga = is the lokîsatipathâna to be practiced prior to attaining the ariya magga or 
1. Has it been sermoned as combined *lokîlokuttara* called *missakamagga*. 

The mathera Tipitkacûlanâga said it is *pubbâgasatipatthâna magga* = the *satipatthâna* *magga* which has to be fulfilled prior to acquring *ariya magga*.  The  Tipitakacûla *mathera*, the teacher of Tipitakasûlanâga mathera, has indicated *missakamagga* as the  *pubbâgasatipatthâna magga*, a combination of both *lokîsatipatthâna magga* and *lokut*- *tarasatipatthâ magga*.  But Tipitakasûlanâga mathera, as a student replied that it is the *pubbâgasatipatthâna magga*, and the teacher repeatedly said it is the *missakamagga*. Because of this repeated sermon by the teacher, the student does not prevent hom from  doing so but has to remain quiet. 

Later Tipitakacûla *mathera*, in an attempt to find the right answer, recited the Mahâsatipatthâna Pâli and found in its conclusion that the Buddha has admittedly state  the right answer. 

*Yo hi koci bhikkhave ime cattaro satipatthâne evum bhâveya satta vassâni ..* (*Ma*.-1: 90) 

`    `Bhikkave …. If a certain meditating monk meditated on the 4-fold *satipatthâna*, as I have instructed, for seven years (… he could attain either *arahatta magga* or, if there still are remnant *kilesâ*, *anâgâmi magga*).  When he arrived at this stanza, he came to realize  what the right answer is. 

*Lokuttaramaggo upajjitvâ satta vassaâni titthamâno nâma natthi* (*Ma*.-*Tha*.-1: 235). 

*Lokuttarâmagga* is not going to remain throughtout the seven years’ duration  (*Ma*.-*Tha*.-1: 235). 

The Buddha decisively expounded as “the *missaka magga* I have mentioned is not attainable in the Mahâsatipatthâna Suttan, but only the *pubbâgasatipatthâna magga* is, as  Culanâga has realized” (*Ma*.-*Tha*.-1: 235). 

In this pubbabhâsatipatthâna magga are included the four kinds of *sammâditthi ñâna* too.  These four are the kinds of knowledge that a meditator must have exercised  

and acquired before arriving at the the *ariya magga*. 

1. The  five-fold  *upâdânakkhandhâ*,  existing  as  the  past,  future,  present,  *ejjatta*, 

*bahiddha*, *olârika*, *sukhuma*, *hîna*, *panîta*, *dûra*, *santika*, of 11 kinds, is the *dhammas* of *dukkha saccâ*.  The *attapaccakkha ñâna*, which can penetratively visualize this *dukha saccâ*, is the *sammâditthi*, which has the ability to understand in the *dukkha saccâ* via the knowledge of *dukkhe ñâna*.  The meditator must have acquired this *sammâditthi* before attaining the *ariya magga*.  By acquiring these knowledge in this way, the factors of the *dukkha  saccâ  dhamma*  can  be  visioned  penetratively  by  virtue  of  *sammâditthi  ñâna* called ***attapaccakkha ñâna***.  Now the meditator is on the path leading to the *nibbâna*.  Note that in this *dukkha saccâ* group are included the past and future five-fold *upâdânak*- *khandhâs*. 

2. The *upâdânakkhandha*, *kilesavatta*, *upâdânakkhandhâ* and *sankhâra*-*kamma* called 

*kamma vatta upâdâbakkhandhâ*, headed by *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna* and which are the causes of five-fold *paccuppan patisandhekhandhâ* etc. of  five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*, are, in accordance with the *dhamma* – *atîte hetavo pañca* – etc., the *upâdânakkhandhâ*s of the past period.  Again, *kilesa vatta upâdânakkhandhâ*, *kammavatta upâdâdankkhan*- *dhâ* cultivated in the present life, the causes due to which there will appear resultant *upâdânakkhandhâ*  termed  *jâti*  (*jarâmarana*)  are  the  *idâhi  hetavo  pañca*,  *âyatim phalapañca* *desanâ*, and according to which they are just the *upâdânakkhandhâ* of the  future period. 

The conspicuous resultant formation of five-fold *paccuppannavipâkavatta* *vipâ*- *ka vatta upâdânakkhandhâ* due to the past *upâdânakkhandhâ* called *kilesavatta kamma- vatta* as the cause, and because of culture of *kilesavatta kammavatta upâdânakkhandhâ* in the present period has resulted in *vipâkavatta upâdânakkhandhâ* to come, are to be  known penetratively by oneself.  ***Attapaccakkha ñâna,*** which penetratively visualizes these, is the *sammâditthi ñâna* which enables one to see the cause of *dukka saccâ* in accordance with *dukkhasamudaye ñânam*.  The meditator must have already acquired this  *sammâditthi ñâna* view before attainment of *ariya magga*. 

In such an endeavour should one employ *anvaya ñâna* which sees by speculation,  or by *attapacakkha ñâna* which sees penetratively oneself?   See the following. 

*Aparapaccayo ñânamevassa ettha hoti* (*Sam*.-1: 258). 

***Aparappaccayâ**ti na aparappaccayena*, *aññassa apattiyâyetvâ attapaccakkhañâna- mevassa ettha ahotîti* (*Sam.*-*Ttha*.2: 32). 

According to this doctrine, it is not to be tried by *anvaya ñâna* which sees by *anumâna* speculative vision. It is not the knowledge handed down from one’s teacher nor that received from others.  The endeavour must be made by ***attapaccakkha ñâna*** which  is seen penetratively by oneself. 

According to ***Ãhârasuttana*** (*Sam*.-1: 253) *desana* method, the knowledge can be oriented toward the past it is possible to discern on *paticca samuppâda*, the cause-result relationship.  (For a detail description see section on Paticca Samuppâda).  (It does not  necessarily mean to discern on all samsâric circus). 

3. *Attapaccakkha ñâna* which can discern on the formation of resultants *vipâkavatta* 

*upâdânakkhandhâ* from causes *avijja*. *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sankhâra*, *kamma* etc. is ***Paccaya- to udayadassana ñâna***.  Because *janaka* factors, which can directly give rise to the *upâ*- *dânakkhandha*, can be dicerned penetratively by the knowledge *paccayato udayadassana  ñâna*, ***samudaya saccâ*** becomes clear (*Visuddhi*-2: 267). 

4. Because of the *arahattamagga*, the causes like *avijja*. *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sankhâra*, 

*kamma* etc. have ceased by nature of *asesavirâga* and *anuppâdanirodha* in such a way that they are non-returnable, non-reappearable.  Due to this cessation the future *khandhâs* also ceased by non-returnable dissolution after *khandhaparinibbâna* (passing away of the aggregates).  The  knowledge  that  can  recognize  this  kind  of  cessation  is  ***paccayato vayadassana ñâna***.  Combination of the *paccayato* *udayadassan ñâna* and *paccayato*  *vayadassana ñâna* is the ***udayabbayadassana ñâna***. 

Here too, for a meditator at worldling stage and when the *udayabbaya ñâna* is in force the time to attain *ariyamagga* and to enter *parinibbâna* will just be the future.  This future may either be the future of the present existance, any one life that is to come.  A meditator  must  attempt  to  acquire  the  knowledge  that  understands  penetratively,  by himself through *attapaccakkha ñâna*, the fact that because of the cessation of causes via *anuppâdanirodha*,  the  resultant  aggregates  cease  by  way  of  *anuppâdanirodha*.   The meaning of this *anuppâdanirodha* is the ***lokînirodhasaccâ dhamma***.  Because of the penetrative vision of the dissolution of derived resultants due to cessation of the causes by way of the *anuppâdanirodha*, the *nirodha saccâ dhamma* becomes clear by virtue of  *paccayto* *vayadassana ñâna* (*Visuddhi*-2: 267). 

The knowledge that can discern the formation of the cause *upâdânakkhandha* and 

the resultant *upâdânakkhandha* is the *khanato udayadassana ñâna*.  The ***dukkha saccâ*** becomes clear because of penetrative vision of *jâtidukkha* (suffering of rebirth), the form- tion  of  *upâdânakkhandhas*  by  means  of  knowledge  of  *udayadassana  ñâna*.   The knowledge that can discern the dissolution of these *upâdânakkhandhas* is the *khanato vayadassana  ñâna*.   As the  *khanato  vayadassana  ñâna* penetratively understands the *maranadukkha*, the incessant dissolution of *upâdânakkhandhas*, even the ***dukkha saccâ*** become clear (*Visuddhi*-2: 267).  These are the knowledges that understand the formation of  *dukkha*  of  the  *upâdânakkhandhas*,  called  the  *dukkha  saccâ*.   The  *khanato udayadassana* *ñâna* and *khanato udaydassan ñâna*, when combined, become ***khanato  udayabbaya dassana ñâna***. 

The above two kinds of *udayabbayadassana ñâna* vision referred to as *paccayato udayabbayadassana*  and  *khanato  udayabbaya  dassana*  are  the  *vipassanâditthi*.   This *vipassanâditthi*—*paccayato udayabbaya* and *khanto udayabbaya*, called the two *udayab*- *baya* of the *sankhâra dhammas*, can momentarily eradicate the *sammoha dhammas* which hinder visualizing these two. It is, therefore, the *lokîsaccâ dhammas*.  Because of the knowledge  of  vision by these two  *udayabbaya* *ñâna*  the  ***lokîmagga saccâ dhamma***  becomes clear in the continuum of a meditator (*Visuddhi*-2: 268).  

By *Arûpasattaka vipassanâ* method of meditation – when the past *manodvârika vipassanâjovîthi nâma dhamma*, called pre-*citta*, can be discerned by post-*citta* called later *vipassanâ manodvârika vipassanâjovîthi nâma dhamma*, and when *vipassanâ ñâna*, 

called *ñâna* = *manodvârika vipassanâjovîthi nâma dhamma* can be discerned again by *bhañgânupassanâ*, the *lokîmagga saccâ dhamma* becomes apparent.  (For the method of  meditation see section on Vipassanâ meditation). 

This is how four-fold *lokîsaccâ* is acquired by means of *vipassanâditthi* during exercising the *lokîvipassanâ*.  This *vipassanâditthi* called *attapaccakkha ñâna* is one of the eight-fold  *lokîmaggañ dhamma*.  In  Mahâsatipatthâna Suttana  the Buddha has 

` `instructed to acquire *pubbagasatipatthâna magga* prior to attaining *ariya magga*. 

A meditator might have wondered if there have ever been disciples who have penetratively visioned *lokasamudaya* and *lokanirodha dhammas* by *sammâditthi ñâna*, called  *paccakkha ñâna*,  after exercising along the line of these instructions.  If so, then  go through the extracts from ***Mahâtahnâsañkhaya Suttana*** given below. 

**Extracts from *Mahâtahnâsañkhaya Suttana*** 

*Bhûtamidanti bhikkhave passathâti*.  *Evum bhante*.  *Tadâhârasambhavunti bhikkhave passathâti*.   *Evum bhante*.  *Tadâhâranirodhâ yam bhutam*, *tam nirodhadhammanti  bhikkave passathâti*.  *Evum bhante* (*Ma*.-1: 236).*** 

***Sammappañâya passato**ti* *idam khandhapañcatam*  *jâtam bhûtam nibbattanti yâthâva- sarasalakkhanato vipassanâpaññâya sammâ passantassa*.  ***Pañâya sudittha**nti vuttana- yeneva vipassanâpaññâya sutthu dittham* (*Ma*,-*Tha*.-2: 207). 

Bhikkhus …. Do you ever discern, by  *vipassanâsammâditthi ñâna*,  that this five- fold *khandhas* (5-fold aggregates) have appeared clearly?, asked the Buddha. 

We do, my Lord,  reply the bhikkhus. 

Bhikkhus …. Do you ever discern, by *vipassnâsammâditthi ñâna*, that this 5-fold  aggregate appear as a result of the causes that clearly exist?, ask the Buddha. 

My Lord, we do, reply the bhikkhus. 

Bhikkhus …. Do you ever discern that the resultant *khandha* possesses the nature of cessation by *anuppâdanirodha* because the causes cease by way of *anuppâdanirodha*?  Ask the Buddha. 

We do, my Lord, reply the bhikkhus (*Ma*.-1: 326). 

These *bhikkhus* penetratively know the fact that *sankhâra* is formed because of *avijjâ* formation, and because of *sankhâra*, *viñâna* is formed, etc. of the processes of the *sankhâraloka* referred to as *anuloma paccayâkâra* = *anulomapaticca samuppâda*, the nature of the  *lokasamudaya*,  because of  *arahatta magga*  of  *avijjâ*  the nature of  the *asesavirâga* = the nature of absolute and non-returnable cessation by way of the nature of   *anuppâdanirodha*.  (For a broader description, see (*Ma*.-1: 327). 

With regard to attaining the vision of *vipassanâ sammâditthi ñâna*, the Buddha has made many questions to these bhikkhus.   From among these question  and  answers,  some which are relevent are given. 

**Questions and Answers** 

The Bhuddha ask the Bhikkhus …. If you have indeed acquired knowledge and sight this way “ do you say the Buddha, as our teacher, is respectable, and with due  respect to the Bhuddha we state this way?” 

No, our Lord, we do not state this way, was the  answer from the Bhikkhus. 

Bhikkhus …. If you have indeed acquired knowledge and sight this way, do you state that “the Buddha as a *samana* has expatiated this way, and we the *samana* have said  this way?” 

No, our Lord, we do not state this way. 

Bhikkhus …. If you have indeed acquired knowledge and sight this way, do you  relay these to other teachers? 

No, our Lord, we do not. 

Bhikkhus …. If you have indeed acquired knowledge and sight this way, could these be, in essence, from the discipline and  *kotuhala mañgalâ*  of many *samana*  and 

` `*byahmana* ? 

No, our Lord, it could not be. 

*Nanu bhikkhave yadeva tuhmâkam sâmam ñâtam sâmam dittham sâmam viditam*, *tadeva  tuhme vadethâti*.  *Evum bhante* (*Ma.*-1: 332). 

***Sâmam ñâtan**ti sayam ñânena ñâtam*.  ***Sâman dittha**nti sayam paññâcakkhunâ dittham*.  ***Sâmam vidita**nti sayam vibhâvitam pâkatam katam* (*Ma*.-*Tha*.-2: 209).  

***Sayam ñânena ñâta**nti paraneyatam muncitvâ attano eva ñânena yâthâvato ñânam*. *Evum bhûtañca sayam paccakkhanto dittham nâma hotîti âha “**sayam paññâcakkhunâ dittha”**nti*.  ***Sayam vibhâvita**nti tehi bhikkhûhi tassa atthassa paccattam vibhûtabhâvum*  

*âpâditam* (*Ma*.-*Tî*.-2: 227). 

Bhikkhus  ….  Do  you  mean  knowing  and  seeing  by  your  self  by  means  of  *Sammâditthipaññâ cakkhu* ( knowlwedge by eye of right understanding) called *attapac- cakkha ñâna*? 

Yes, our Lord, we do. 

Bhikkhus … *Sadhu* = good.  Bhikkhus …. With this *dhamma*, which you can see by yourself, which can bringforth benefit any time, which is an ideal to demonstrate to others, which should be maintained within your body and mind, which only the learned individuals can know and appreciate, I have directed you, my sons, to the *nibbâna* (to have approached the *nibbâna*).  Bhikkhus …. This is the *dhamma*, which you should discern; it can bring-forth benefit any time; it is demonstrable to others to exercise; it should be maintained with one’s body and mind; only the learned individuals can know  and appreciate.  In this way I have preached to you.  I preach this *dhamma* with reference  to the fact that you have distinctly know by own (*Ma.*-1: 332).* 

***Sampati Dittha Sankhâra, Sampati Adittha Sankhâra*** 

After going through various explanations given above, and if the meditator under- stands and contended with, he will also agree with the the division of the past and future  *sankhâra dhammas* into two classes as given below. 

Among  the  characters of  the *paticca samuppâda  dhammas* from  the *avijjâ*  to *jaramarana* are included the *dhamma* groups of the past period, of the future and of the present.  Similarly among the *samudaya dhamma* groups are included the past causes called *dhamma* groups of the past period, of the future and of the present.  A meditator should partly acquire the knowledge of the characters of the *paticca samuppâda* and the nature of interrelationship among these characters relative to meditator’s *pâramî* *ñâna*.  This knowledge is acquired by  *vipassanâ sammâditthi ñâna*  called the  *attapaccakkha  ñâna*. 

Again according to method of *saccâdesanâ* – among the *dukkha saccâdhamma* groups are included resultants of the past, future and the present referred to as *dhamma* of the past period, of the future period and of the present period.  In the same way, among the *samudaya saccâ dhamma* groups are included the past cause referred to as past period *dhammas*, the present cause referred to as the present period *dhammas*, and for those who are still continuing  the  infinite rounds of  rebirth, the future cause referred to as future  period *dhammas*. 

In the accounts of *lokînirodhasaccâ* are included the future *dhamma* groups for the one who is going to pass away in the present life, and later future *dhamma* for the one who is going to pass away in any one of the future lives.  The *lokîmagga saccâ dhamma* is the process of  *vipassanâ manodvârika jovîthi*  dictated by the practising *vipassanâ sammâditthi ñâna* and is therefore the *dhamma* groups of the present period. The *sâvakas* should have tried to discern penetratively the four-fold *lokîmagga saccâ* in part, before arriving at* the *ariamagga* with their corresponding *pârami*s via *attapaccakkha ñâna*,  referred to as *vipassanâ sammâditthi ñâna*, which occur prior to *ariyamagga*. 

The above mentioned past, future (and present) *sankhâra dhammas* discerned via the  *attapaccakkha  ñâna*,  referred  to  as  *vipassanâ  sammâditthi  ñâna*,  are  the  ***sampati dittha sankhâra** dhammas*.  The journey through the sasâric circus is too long for a sâvaka to have discenred these *dhammas* completely.  Those *dhammas* that have not been discerned by the *attapaccakkha ñâna*, referred to as *vipassanâ sammâditthi ñâna*, are the ***sampati adittha sankhâra** dhammas*.  A meditator who has completed discerning the *sampati dittha sankhâra dhammas*, can do so in a similar way for the past and future *sampati adittha sankhâra dhammas* by knowledge of *anvaya ñâna*.   It must be noted that this *anvaya ñâna* is the knowledge not included in *vipassanâ sammâditthi ñâna*, called *attapaccakkha ñâna*, but a kind of  ***paccakkhan ñâna***  that always follows the *vipassanâ  ñâna*. 

Only if the past, future and present *sankhâra dhammas* are taken to be of two classes as *sampti ditthi sankhâra* and *sampti aditthi sankhâra*, can the solution can be made.  If all the past and present *sankhâra dhammas* are blindly accepted  as discernible by *anumâna* only by *anvaya ñâna*,  then the  expations in relation to the penetrative knowledge by the *vipassanâ sammâditthi ñâna*, called *attapaccakkha ñâna* of the nature** of the relationship of the *paticca samuppâda*, and of four-fold *lokîsaccâ*, would be of no  meaning.  The learned may sometimes have overlooked the fact. 

If the division of the past and future *sankhâra*s into the past and future *sampti dittha* and *sampti adittha sankhâra*s cannot be accepted, then the ofllowing expressions  from Patisambhidhâ Magga Pâli. 

*Jâtâ avijjâ paccuppannâ*, *sattâ nibbattilakkhanam vayo*, *anupassanâ ñânam*. R.  *Jâto bhavo paccuppanno*, *tassa nibbattilakkhanam udayo*, *viparinâmalakkhanam vayo*,  *anupassanâ ñânam* (*Patisam.*- 52). 

[Even *paramatthadhammasabhâvalakkhanâ*, called the material body formation  clearly as *upâda*-*thî*-*bhañga*, is said to have attained *patiladdhattabhâva* = *attabho*.] 

`          `The *paramatthadhammasabhâvalakkhanâ* while in its formative stage, called *avijjâ* which  is  (one’s  own  form)  still  attaining  is  the  *paccuppanna  dhamma*.   The *sañkhatalakkhanâ* which should be taken arising stage of *avijjâ* is the *udaya* = arising.  The *sankhatalakkhanâ* which is taken as deterioration is the perishing away =  noted as the *vaya*.  The *nupassanâ* knowledge of concentration on the *udaya* and *vaya* time and  again is the *udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna*. R.  

The *paramatthadhammasabhâvalakkhanâ* while in its formative stage, the *bhava* 

(called  *kammabhava*  +  *upapattibhava*)  still  attaining,  is  the  *paccuppanna dhamma*. The *asañkhatalakkhanâI,* which can be taken as the arsing stage of that *bhava* is  the  arising  =  noted  as  the  *udaya*.     The  *sankhatalakkhanâ*  which  is  taken  as deterioration is the perishing away =  noted as the *vaya*.  The *nupassanâ* knowledge of concentration on the  

*udaya* and *vaya* time and again is the *udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna* (*Patisam*.- 52). 

If a breakdown is made of the characters of the *paticca samuppâda* with the *paccuppanna bhava* in the middle, then *avijjâ*, *sañkhâra dhammas* etc. are the *dhamma* groups of the past period.   *Upapattibhava* referred to as  *jâti*  is the  *dhamma*  groups that  belong to the future period.  The *viññâna*, *nâma*-*rûpa*, *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedanâ*, *tahnâ*,  *upâdâna* and *kamma bhava* are all *dhamma* groups belonging to the preent period. 

These *dhammas*, however, are *dhamma*s that have arisen, arising, and still to arise as *upâda*-*thî*-*bhañga*.  These *dhammas* are still included in the three *khana*s of *upâda*-*thî*- *bhañga* duration, and still staitc in these three *khana*s.  And during these three periods the *paramatthadhammasabhâvalakkhanâ* referred to as the *paramattha* material body, the  *attabho*, are momentarily acquired and therefore termed as the *paccuppanna dhamma*.  

What it really means is this.  It is true that avijjâ is the *dhamma* of past period.  It has then existed clearly in the form of *upâda*-*thî*-*bhañga*.   While existing so during that period,  that  *avijjâ*  is  referred  to  as  the  *paccuppanna  dhamma*.   When  the  meditator discerns this *avijjâ* via *udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna*, he must concentrate on, and acquire, the arising phase *upâda* and perishing phase *bhañga* of this *avijjâ*.  If one can concentrate on the arising and perishing away of the *avijjâ*, then that *udayabbayânupassanâ ñâna* is referred to be concentrating on the *avijjâ* of the present period.  Note that the same applies the concnetration on the characters of the *paticcasamuppâda* during remaining three periods.  In connection with this   *paccuppanna  dhamma*  the great teacher of the  doctrine opened as follows.  It has been translated by Pye Sayâdaw. 

*Nayadassanavasena vâ evum vuttam*.  *Pathamahñi paccuppannadhammânam  udayabbayam disvâ atha atîtânâgate nayam neti* (*Mahâtî*.-2: 423).*  

In another way — by nayadassana it means this way.  To begin with acquire the *udayabbaya*  by  *paccakkha*,  and later the same applies for the past and future periods  (Pyî.- Visuddhi Nissaya – 5: 165). 

**What *Paticcasamuppâda Dhamma* Is** 

This cause-result relationship = *paticca samuppâda dhamma* was not created by the Buddha himself.  Whether or not the Buddhas, named *tathâgata* (one who has found the  truth),  have  appeared  in  this  *loka*  (world),  this  causal  relationship  =  *paticca samuppâda dhamma* will still exist in this world.  But only when *sammâsambuddha*s (the perfectly enlightened ones), named *tathâgata*, have appeared in this world expounded the cause-result relationship  =  *paticca samuppâda dhamma*,  the sentient beings have the  chance to know it (Sam.-1: 246.  See Paccaya Suttan). 

Suppose the Buddha has not appeared in this world, or the Buddha has appeared but sentient beings have not the chance to listen to his teaching, or they have did have the  chance  but  were  under  the  influence  of  such  extreme  beliefs  as  *sassataditthi*  and *ucchedaditthi*,  then they would not be able to understand the  *paticcasamuppâdha  dhamma*. 

This cause-result relationship = *paticcasamuppâdha dhamma* have deep meaning. It is hard to understand.  To the Venerable Ãnanda, who expressed *paticcasamuppâdha* to be simple and shallow, was cautioned by the Buddha as “Mâhevum Ãnanda mâhevum Ãnanda,   my young brother Ãnanda do not say this way,  Ãnanda do not say this way.”  (*Dî*.- *Sam*.- 2: 47; *Sam*.-1: 318). 

However hard and deep it may be, the *paticcâsamuppâda dhamma* will have to be clearly and analytically understood by *attapaccakkha ñâna* and *sammâditthi ñâna* etc. of the three *pariññâ*.  Without penetratively understanding this way escape from vicious rounds of rebirth, ageing, suffering, the death and recurrent of rebirths.  Without the knowledge of the cause-result relationship = *paticcasamuppâda dhamma*, no one should  be recognized as *samanabyâmana* (see *Sam*.- 1: 255 – 256). 

The Buddhas, who have arisen, arising and going to arise know the this *paticca* *samuppâda dhamma* analytically, and that is the reason why they are able to have arisen, still arising and going to arise.  As long as the sentient beings are ignorant of the *paticca* *samuppâda dhamma*, they will be under influence of the *sassataditthi* and *ucchedaditthi* and will still be bounded by miserable suffering.  Therefore, those who want to escape from  various  *sansâravatta  dukkhas*  must  try  to  penetratively  understand  the  *paticca* *samuppâda* via  *sammâditthi ñâna* called *attapaccakkha ñâna*.  This has many times been  advised in Nidânavaggasamyutta *desana*s (see *Sam*.-1: 257; Kiccânagutta Suttana etc.). 

***Tadanvaya Dhammas in Patisambhidâmagga Pâli*** 

*Aniccato manasikaroto adhimokkhabahulassa sandañdariyam âdhipateyam hoti*, *bhâvanâ cattârañdariyâni tadanvayâ honti*, *sahajâtapaccayâ honti*, *aññamaññapaccayâ* 

*honti*, *nissayapaccayâ honti*, *sampayuttapaccayâ honti*, *ekarasâ hoti*, *ekarasatthena bhâvana*, *yo sammâpatipanno*, *so bhâveti*, *natthi micchâpatipannassa idariyabhâvanâ*.  *Dukkhato mansikaroto passaddhibahulassa samâdhiñdariyam âdhipateyam hoti*. R. *Anattato mansikaroto vedabahulassa pañiñdariyam âdhipateyam hoti*. R.  (*Patisam.*245-246). 

***Tadanvâyâ hontî**ti tam anugâmini tam anuvattinî honti* (*Patisam*.-Tha.-2: 161). 

The *sankhâra dhammas* taken to heart as *anicca*, and the determination as *anicca* 

- in  individual  with  high  *adhimocka*  (*saddhârimockkha*)  determination  (deter-mined faith), *saddhindriye* (faculty of faith) is his principle.  In *vipassanâ* meditation the four- fold  *indriya*s (controlling principles), such as effort, mindfulness, concentration,  wisdom, are always associated with that principle. R. 

The *sankhâra dhammas*  taken to heart as *dukkha* is peacefulness = in one who is fully relaxed *sammâdhindre* (faculty of concentration) is his principle. In the *vipassanâ* meditation the the four-fold  *indriya*s  (faith, effort, mindfulness, wisdom),  are always  associated with that principle.  R.   

In wise individual who takes the *sankhâra dhammas* to heart as *anatta*, in him *paññindre* (faculty of widom) is the principle.  In the *vipassanâ* meditation the the four- fold  *indriya*s  (faith, effort, mindfulness, concentration),  are always associated with that principle.  R.  The are *sahajâta*-*paccaya* (conascence condition), *aññamañña*-*paccaya* (mutuality  condition),  *nissaya*-*paccaya*  (dependence  condition),  *sampayutta*-*paccaya* (relation of association) and functional similarity.  From sense of functional similarity, it is the *bhâvanâ* (mental culture).  A meditator practises on good exercise termed *sammâ*- *patipanna* (having the right view).  The meditator is taken as practising for maturity of *indre*, referred to as *indriyabhâvana* (power of mental culture).  A certain individual practises concentration on micchâpatipatta procedure.  Then he cannot be taken as taken  as practising for maturity of *indre*, referred to as *indriyabhâvana* (*Patisam.*245-246). 

There are fve classes of *indre*: *saddhâ* (faith), *vîriya* (effort), *sati* (mindfulness), *sammâdhi* (concentration) and *paññâ* (wisdom).  Then any one who takes the *sankhâra* *dhammas* as *anicca* and concentrate on it, the *saddhindre* is his principle.  To this are associated the the four-fold *indre*: *vîriya*, *sati*, *sammâdhi* and *paññâ*.  This *saddhâ* and the four-fold *indre* arise in association with each other within a *cittakhana* (thought moment). *Saddhâ* supported these four by force of *sahajâta*, *aññamañña*, *nissaya* and *sampayutta*. Therefore, these four-fold *indre* have been expounded to be ***tadanvayadhamma*** which is  associated with *sammâdhindre*. 

In an individual who takes *sankhâra dhammas* as *anatta* to heart, the *paññañdre* is his principle.  The *indre* such as *saddhâ*, *vîriya*, *sati*, *sammâdhi* are always associated with the *paññañdre*.  This *paññañdre* supports these four via the forces of *sahajâta*, *aññamñña*,  *nissaya* and *sampayuttapaccaya*.  Therefore, these four-fold  *indre*  are  always associated with the *paññañdre* and are expatiated as ***tadanvayadhamma***.  

These ***tadanvayadhamma*s** are the *dhammas*  (mental perception of *vipassanâ*) formed in association with, and in reciprocal support of each other, by way of *sahajâta*, *aññamñña*,  *nissaya* and *sampayuttapaccaya*, within a *vipassanâjo* and a *cittakhana*.   

It is not the kind of *anvaya ñâna* referred to as analytic *paccavekkhana ñâna*, nor included  in  the  *vipassanâditthi  ñâna*,  which   always  arises  in  associated  with *vipassanâsammâditthi* *ñâna* called the *attapaccakkha ñâna*  as explained above.   It is neither the kind of *anvaya ñâna*, referred to as *paccavekkha ñâna*, always formed in association with *lokuttaramagga ñâna* and *lokuttaraphala ñâna* nor is it included in  

` `*ariyamagga ñâna* and *ariyaphala ñâna*. 

***Anvaya Ñâna* that is always associated with *Ariyamagga Ñâna*** 

In **Ñanavatthu Suttan** of Nidânavaggasamyutta Pâli the Buddha indicated (44) kinds of *sampatti*s (sustained deep mental absorption) existing termed as  *ñânavatthu* (mental  material)  knolwedge.   The  11  characters  of  the  *paticcasamuppâda*  from *jarâmarana* through *sankhâra* have been expatiated to be endowed with four kinds of knowledge.  Altogether there will be (11 x 4 = 44) *ñânavatthu*.  Here some examples will  be presented. 

1. *Jarâmarana ñânam* =  the knowledge that understands the *jarâmarana*, 
1. *Jarâmaranasamudaye ñânam* = the knowledge which understands the origin of the *jarâmarana*, 
1. *Jarâmarananirodha ñânam* =*  the knowledge that understands the cessation of the *jarâmarana*, 
1. *Jarâmarananirodhagâminiyâ patipadâya ñânam* = the knowledge that understands the *nirodha saccâ,* the  truth of cessation of the *jarâmarana* =  the*  
\*
`      `knowledge that*  understands the practice of attainment of *nibbâna*.  R.* 

1. *Sankhâresu ñânam* =  the knowledge that understands the *sankhâra*s, 
1. *Sankhârasamudaye  ñânam*  =  the  knowledge  that  understands  the  origin  of  the *sankhâra*s, 
1. *Sankhâranirodha ñânam* = the knowledge that understands the *nirodha saccâ*, the truth of cessation, of *sankhâras*, 
1. *Sankhâranirodhagâminiya patipadâya ñânam* = the knowledge that understands the *nirodha*, the cessation, of *sankhâra*s = the knowledge that understands the 
\*
`      `practice leading to *nibbâna*. 

This is how each character of *paticcasamuppâda* has the four *saccâ* (truth) giving a  total of (44) 11 characters. 

1. *Jarâmarana* refers to the aggregates which have the nature of *jarâmarana* (ageing, decay and death).  The expression that knowledge that understands the *jarâmarana* refers to the knowledge which understands *dukkha saccâ* (truth of suffering) of *upâdânakkhandhâ* (the clinging aggregate), which have the nature of *jarâmarana*. 
1. *Samudaya* which is the cause of  *jarâmarana* is *jâti*.  *Jâti* is the beginning of life which has the nature of *jâti* or the nature of *upâda* (arising).  The knowledge that understands this *jâti* is knowledge that understands the *samudaya* (arising) of the cause of *jarâmarana*. 
1. *Jarâmarananirodha dhamma*  is the *nibbâna*.  This *nibbâna* = the knowledge that understands the *nirodha saccâ* is the knowledge that understands the *marananiro*- 

`      `*dha saccâ*. 

4. *Jarâmarannirodhagâminipatipadâ* is the eight-fold *ariyamagga* (Noble Eight-fold  Path) related *to ariyamagga* (the Noble Path).  The knowledge that understands the Noble Eight-fold Path is the knowledge that understands the practice leading to the *nibbâna* where *jarâmarana* has ceased. 

The origin of *jâti* is the *kamma bhava* (sensual existance); the origin of existance is the *upâdâna* (clinging to existance); the origin of *upâdâna* is *tahnâ* (craving); the origin of *tahnâ* is the *vedanâ* (feeling); the origin of *vedanâ* is  *phassa* (contact); the origin of the *phassa* is the *sa*.*l* *âyatana* (sense bases); the origin of *sa*.*l* *âyatana* is the *nâma*-*rûpa* (mind and matter); the origin of *nâma*-*rûpa* is the *viññâna* (perception); the origin of *viñ*- *ñâna*  is  the  *sankhâra*;  and  the  origin  of *sankhâra*  is  the  *avijjâ*  (ignorance).   This  is distinct.  In this way each of the 11 characters of *paticca samuppâda* has four factors, making it  (44)  mental properties altogether.   (See *Sam*.-1: 288 - 290 for a broader  treatment). 

Again in the same Suttana the Buddha has preached on the arising of *anvaya ñâna* 

` `in this way. 

*Yato kho bhikkhave ariyasâvako evum jarâmaranam pajânâti*, *evum jarâmaranasamu- dayam pajânâti*, *evum jarâmarananirodham pajânâti*, *evum jarâmarananirodhagâminin patipadam pajânâti*.  *Dhamme ñânam so iminâ dhammena viditena akâlikena pattena* 

` `*pariyogâh*.*l* *ena atîtânâgate nayam neti* (*Sam.*-1: 289). 

*Ettha ca na catusaccadhammena vâ sakkâ atîtânâgate nayam netum*, *catucassena pana maggañânena patividdhe parato paccavekkhañânam nâma hoti*, *tena nayam netîti  veditabbâ* (*Sam*.-*Tha*.-2: 62). 

Bhikkhus …. An *ariyasâvaka* (Noble Disciple) knows the following. 

1. He understands the *jarâmarana*, 
1. He understands the *samudaya* as the cause of *jarâmarana*, 
1. He understands the *nibbâna dhamma* as the truth of cessation of the *jarâmarana*, 
1. He understands the *magga saccâ* which is the practice leading to attainment of  

`      `*nirodhanibbâna* where *jarâmaran* has ceased. 

` `This the ***dhamma ñâna*** of the *ariyasâvaka* = the *ariyamagga ñâna* (knowledge of Noble Path) which understands the *catusaccadhamma* (dhamma of Four Noble Truth).  This *ariyasâvaka*, *ariyamagga ñâna cakkhu* (eye of wisdom for Noble Path) (by nature of *asammohapativedha*),  that  is  sighted  by  *paccakkha*,  that  is  to  be  understood  by *ariyamagga paññâ*, that could result any time (= by one’s own *ariyamagga* after which ariyaphala could result any time), attaining the Four Noble Truth by means of which the  *catusaccadhamma* is acquired, by this *catusaccâdhamma* contained in it by *ariyamagga* *ñâna* or in other words by *ariyamagga ñâna* which penetratively understands the *catusac*- *cadhamma*, and applicable also in past and future, i.e arrives at the *paccavekkhanâ ñâna*  that understands the four-fold *saccâdhamma* of the past and the future (*Sam*.-1: 289).  

*Ye kho keci atîtamaddhânam samanâ vâ byâmanâ vâ jarâmaranam abhaññamsu*, *jarâmaranasamudayam abhaññamsu*, *jarâmarananirodham abhaññamsu*, *jarâmarana- nirodhagâminim patipadam abhijânissanti,*  *abhaññamsu*, *sabbete evameva abhaññamsu*,  *seyathâpâham etarahi*. 

*Yepi hi keci anâgatamaddhânam samanâ vâ byâmanâ vâ jarâmaranam abhijânissanti*, *jarâmarasamudayam* *abhijânissanti*, *jarâmaranirodham abhijânissanti*, *jarâmarana- nirodhagâminim patipadam abhijânissanti, sabbete evameva patipadam abhijânissanti,* *seyathâpâham etarahîti.  Idamassa anvaye ñânam*. 

*Yato kho bhikkhave ariyasâvakassa imâni dve ñânâni parissudhâni hunti pariyodâtâni dhamme ñânañca anvaye ñânañca*.  *Ayam vaccati bhikkhave ariyasâvako “ditthisam- panno” itipi*, “*dassanasampanno*” *itipi*, “*âgato imam saddhammam*” *itipi*, *passati imam saddhamam” itipi*, “*sikkhena ñânena samantagato” itipi*, “*sikkhaya vijjâya samantagato” itipi*, “*dhammasotam samâpanno*” *itipi*, “*ariyo nibbedhikapañño*” *itipi*, *amatadvâram âhicca titthati*” *itipîti*  (*Sam*.1: 289). 

In the past these *samanabyâmana*s understood the *jarâmarana*, *jarâmaranasamu- daya*,  *jarâmarananirodha*,  the way of practice leading to  *jarâmarananirodha*.  They 

` `understood these the way I do today. 

`         `In future too, these *samanabyâmana*s will understand the *jarâmarana*, *jarâmarana*- *samudaya*, *jarâmarananirodha*, practice leading to *jarâmarananirodha*.  These *samana- byâmana*s will understand the way I do today.  The same applies to the knowledge in the past and present.  This the  ***anvaya ñâna***, which  is always associated with  *ariayamagga  ñâna*. 

Bhikkhus …. An *ariyasâvaka*, at a certain time can be taken as one who possesses the *dhamma ñâna* called *ariyamagga ñâna* which understands the *ariya sacca dhammas* by virtue of *asamohapativedha*, the anvaya ñâna called the *paccavekkhana ñâna* which understands the association with *ariyamagga ñâna*, and these two *ñâna*s are untainted and clean.  Bhikkhus …. Then this *sâvaka* can be taken as one complete with right view, right eye of wisdom, who has acquired the *dhamma* of morally good people, who has the sight of this dhamma, competant with eye of wisdom and *sikkha ñâna*  still practicing, competant with eye of wisdom and *vijjâ ñâna*  still practicing, well attained the peaceful *dhamma*, one with  *ariyapaññâ* (Noble Knowledge) which eradicates the mass of  *kilesâ*,  and one at the door to the *nibbâna* (*Sam*.1: 289). 

This  *anvaya  ñâna*  is  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  is  always  associated  with *ariya*-*magga ñâna*  or *ariyamaggañânaphalañâna*.  When you have understood the 4-fold  *saccâ*, then you can exercise on it as an object. 

**Extracts from *Vibhinpâli*** 

*Attha katamam dhamme ñânam*, *catûsu maggesu catûsu phalesu paññâ dhamme ñânam*, *so iminâ dhammena ñâtena ditthena pattena viditena pariyogâhlena atînâgate nayam  neti*. 

*Yehi keci anâgatamaddhânam samanâ vâ byâmanâ vâ dukkham abbaññamsu, dukkha*- *samudayam abbaññamsu*, *dukkhanirodham abbaññamsu*, *dukkhanirodhagâminim patipadâ abbaññamsu*, *imaññeva te dukkhasamudayam abbaññamsu*, *imaññeva te dukkhasamudayam abbaññamsu*, *imaññeva te dukkhanirodham abbaññamsu*, *imaññeva  te dukkhanirodhagâminim patipadam abbaññamsu*. 

***Yehi keci anâgatamaddhânam samanâ vâ byâmanâ vâ dukkham* *abhijânissanti*,** 

***dukkha-samudayam abhijânissanti*, *dukkhanirodham abhijânissanti*, *dukkhanirodhagâminim patipadam abhijânissamti*, *imaññeva te dukkahm abhijânissanti*, *imaññañeva te dukkha-nirodhagâminim patipadam abhijânissanti yâ tattha paññâ pajânanâ*.  R.  *Amoho dham-*** 

***macayo sammâditthi*, *imam vuccati anvaye ñânam* (*Abhi*.-2: 241-342).** 

Among these *ñâna*s, which is the *dhamma ñâna*?  The *paññâ* in four-fold *ariya*- *magga* and four-fold *ariyaphala* is the *dhamma ñâna*.  The ariyasâvaka, by *ariyamagga* *cakkhu ñâna* referred to as *dhamma cakkhu*, that is visible and understandable via  by nature of *asamohapativedha*, that give rise to result in no time, because of its existance to acquirement of the four-fold Noble Truth, that is to attain *catusaccadhamma*, that reflects *ariyamagga ñâna*, this *catusaccadhamma* = by *maggañâna dhamma* that penetratively understands  *catusaccadhamma*, applicable to the past and future = aquires the *paccavek*- *khanâ ñâna* which understands the past and future four-fold Noble Truth. 

In the past these *samana byâmana*s have penetratively understood the *dukkha*, the *dukkhasamudaya*, the *dukkhanirodha*, and the practice leading to *dukkhanirodha*.  With the exception of *tahnâ*, they have understood only the *tebhûmaka dhamma* (*dhamma* belonging  to  three  stages  of  being)  penetratively  as  *dukkha*.   These  *samana*s  have understood only the *tahnâ* penetratively as *dukkha samudaya*.  All these *samana*s have understood only the *asankhata dhâtu* (the absolute element) penetratively to be peaceful element, the *nibbâna dhamma*, as the *dukkhanirodha*.  They all have understood this  eight-fold *magga*  (Noble Path of Eight Contituents)  *dhamma*  penetratively as the only  exercise which could lead to *dukkhanirodha*.  

In future too these *sammana byâmanas* will understand penetratively the *dukkha*, *dukkha samudaya*, *dukkhanirodha*, and exercise leadding to *nirodha saccâ*.  With the exception of *tahnâ*, they will understand only the *tebhûmaka dhamma* penetratively as *dukkha*.  These  *samana*s  will  understand  only  the  *tahnâ*  penetratively  as  *dukkha samudaya*. All these *samana*s will understand only the *asankhata dhâtu* penetratively to be  peaceful  element,  the  *nibbâna  dhamma*,  as  the  *dukkhanirodha*.  They  all  will understand this  eight-fold *magga*  *dhamma*  penetratively as the only exercise which could lead to *dukkhanirodha*.   In this case *paññâ pajânana*. R.  *Amoha dhamma vicaya* *sammâditthi ñâna*  does appear.  This knowledge should be called  ***anvaya ñâna*** (*Abhi*.-2:  341-342). 

*Yadetam iminâ catusaccâgpcram maggañânam adhigatam*, *tena ñânena kâranabhûtena  atîtânâgate paccavekkhanañâna sankhâtam nayam neti* (*Abhi.-Tha.-*2: 398). 

The *ariyamagga dhamma* penetratively understands, by nature of *arammanapati*- *vedha*, the *nirodhasaccâ nibbâna dhamma* taking it directly as the object of meditation.  By  eradication  of  the  *moha*  (ignorance),  which  hinder  understanding  the  four  *saccâ*, remaining three *saccâ* and be understood penetratively by virtue of *asamhohapativedha*. Therefore, the *ariyamagga ñâna* understands *nirodha saccâ* taking it as the object, by *kiccasaccâ*  understand  the  remainining  three  *saccâ*s;  only  the  *magga  ñâna*  can understand  all  the  four  *saccâ*s.   The  *ariyamaggaphala  ñâna*  is  understands  only  the *nirodhasaccâ* by virtue of the nature of *arammanapativedha* which is taken as the object.  Referring to this kind of understanding, knowledge of  *ariyamagga ñâna*  and of *ariyam*- *maggaphala ñâna* has been indicated to be the *dhamma ñâna* (*Abhi.-Tha.-*2: 398). 

This meditator have acquired the *ariyamagga ñâna* which has taken the four-fold  *saccâ* as its object.  Because of *ariyamagga ñâna*, *anvaya ñâna*, referred to as *paccavek*- *khana ñâna*,  appears according to method applicable to concentration on the past and future.  With this  *anvaya ñâna*,  the meditation can be made on both the past and future  (*Abhi.- Tha.-*2: 398). 

This *anvaya ñâna* is just a kind of knowledge that is always associated with the *paccavekkhana ñâna*.  This *anvaya ñâna* is the *paccavekkhana ñâna* which is always associated with *ariyamagga ñâna*  and  *ariyaphala ñâna*, but  not included in  *attapacca- vekkha ñâna* called *ariyamagga sammâditthi*. 

In this way there are two *anvaya ñâna*, one which is associated with *vipassanâ ñâna* and one associated with *lokuttara ariyamagga ñâna* and *ariyaphala ñâna*.  This *anvaya ñâna*, however, is not a kind of *dhamma* which occurs in association with either *ariyamagga ñâna* nor *ariyaphala ñâna* within a *cittakhana* or a *jovîthi*.  It is the kind of *paccavekkhana* *ñâna*  which appears after arising of  *vipassanâjo*, *maggajo*, *vîthijo*,  with  an elapse of many *jovîthi*s. 

The ***anvaya ñâna** dhamma*s** in** the above mentioned Patisambhidâmagga Pâli are are not included in the two kinds of *anvaya ñâna*.  The Buddha did not preach as *anvaya ñâna*,  but  as  *tadanvaya  dhamma*.   These  *tadanvaya  dhamma*a  are  forceful *indriyabhâvanâ  dhamma*s  which  are  formed  in  association  within  a  *vipassanâjo* *cittakhana*, and in support of each other of the *sahajâta*, *aññamañña*, *nissaya*, *sampa- yutta*, and *paccaya* forces. 

Now extracts  from *suttana*s* such as Aparijânanasuttana will be described. ***Sabbam bhikkhave anbhijânam aparijânam avirâjayam appajayam abhabbo dukkhakka-*** 

*yâya*. R. 

*Sabbam ca kho bhikkave abhijânam parijânam pajaham bhabbo dukkhakkhayâya*  (*Sam*.-2: 249 – 250). 

*Iti imassamim sutte tissopi pariññâ kathitâ honti*.  “*abhijân*”*anti hi vacanena ñâta-pariññâ kathitâ*, “*abhijân*”*anti vacanena tîranapariññâ*, “*virâjayam pajaha*”*nti dvîhi*  

*pahânapariññâti* (*Sam.-Tha.-*3: 6).  

Bhikkhus …. If *rûpa*-*nâma dhamma* (the five *upâdânakkhandhâ* = 12 species of *âyatana* =) are not understood completely by  means of *ñâtapariññâ*,  not analytically understood by *tîranapariññâ*, and if the *tahnâ*, which is clinging on to the *rûpa*-*nâma dhamma*, has not been eradicated completely by means of *pahânapariññâ*, the *dukkha*  cannot be dissolved.  R. 

Bhikkhus  ….  If  *rûpa*-*nâma  dhamma*  (the  five  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  =  12 species of *âyatana* =) are understood completely by means of *ñâtapariññâ*, analytically understood by *tîranapariññâ*, and if the *tahnâ*, which is clinging on to the *rûpa*-*nâma dhamma*, has been eradicated completely by means of  *pahânapariññâ*, then the  *dukkha*  can be dissolved (*Sam.-Tha.-*3: 6). 

*Paccakkhakaranattena ñâtapariññâ tîranapariññâ ca gatitâ hoti* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2:65). 

In accordance with this opening and *samvannanâ* (praises) the *pariññâ paññâ* (knowledge) are the *attapaccakkhan ñânas*.  These *pariññâ*s will further be explained.  In this case too, the *pariññâ* can be classed as *lokî pariññâ* and *lokuttara pariññâ*.  Again in the *lokî pariññâ* are *ñâtapariññâ*, *tîranapariññâ* and *pahânapariññâ* as three classes.  

In *lokuttara pariññâ* also are *ñâtapariññâ*, *tîranapariññâ* and *pahânapariññâ*.  First the  three *lokî pariññâ* will be presented. 

**The *Lokî Ñâtapariññâ*** 

*Tattha* “*r*.*u*  *ppanalakkhanam*.  *rûpam*. , *vedayitalakkhan*. *â vedanâ*”*ti evum*.  *tesam*.  *tesam*.  *dhammânam paccattalakkhanasanlakkhanavasena pavattâ paññâ **ñâtapariññâ** nâma*. R. 

*Tattha sankhârapricchedato patthâya yâva paccayapariggahâ ñâtapariññâya bhûmi*  (*Visuddhi*-2: 241). 

Among those three *pariññâ*s “*rûpa* is the *dhamma* that is subject to change, and *vedanâ* is the *dhamma* which has the nature of suffering.”  By having the ability to analytically understand the ultimate reality of each of the general characters of the five- fold  *khandhâ*,  the  knowledge  which  can  analyse  the  mind  and  matter  called  *nâma*- *rûpapariccheda ñân*. *a* is acquired.  This knowledge plus the *paccayapariggaha ñâ*.*n* *a*, which can canalyse and culture the causes and results in the past, future and present  moments, are called the ***ñâtapariññâ*** (*Visuddhi*-2: 241). 

*So* “*idam*.  *nâma-rûpam*.  *na hetu na paccayâ nibbattam*. , *sahetu sappaccayâ nibbattam*. . *Ko kapmanmaaspsaa chceatyuâ*, ,*k âoh pâarnaap apcaccacyaây oc*”*ât*”*it iu ptaaspsaar pikakchcaanytaom* .“  *avvaivjjaâtpthaacpceatyvââ*,*  “*taahtînteâppia pcaccacyaay, â* 

*ceva paccayasamuppannadhammâ*.  *ca*, *anâgatepi etarahipi paccayâ ceva  paccaya- samuppannadhammâ ca*, *tato u*.*d* *dham satto vâ* .*p* *uggalo vâ natthi*, *suddhasankhâra-puñjo evâ*”*ti tîsu addhâsu kañkham vitarahi*.  *Ayam pana vipassanâsankhârasalakkha*.*n* *â  **ñâtaparinñâ*** *nâma* (*Abhi*.-*T*..*t* *ha*.2: 241 – 242). 

The meditator who has cultivated the five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* = 12 *âyatana* = *rûpa*-*nâma* *dhammas* analytically by means of knowledge to arrive at *paramatthadham*- *masabhâvalakkhan*. *â*, should note that “it is not that the  *nâma*-*rûpa* is formed as a direct result of *hetu* (the root) as a cause = *paccaya* (condition) as a cause, without distinct j*u*a*p*n*a*a*t*k*th*a*a*  *m*.( p*b*r*h*o*a*d*k*u*a*c* t(isounp)p, orwt)h aisc ha  ccaouuseld.   Isnu fpapcot,r t*n* *â*r*m*es*a*u-*r*lt*û*a*p*n*a*t  hfaosr mreastuilotend  o=n lya rbiseecsa uswei tthhoeruet*  

is *hetu* which is the direct cause of a result = the present of the d. istinct *janaka* as a cause, 

. 

the *paccaya* as a cause which is supportive = distinct *upatthambhaka* as a cause.  Then what are these causes called *hetu* = *janaka*? If the supporting cause the *paccaya* = *upat-* *thambhaka* are investigated 

1. Because of the cause referred to as *avijjâ*, 
1. Because of the cause referred to as *tah*.*n* *â*, 
1. Because of the cause referred to as *kamma*, 
1. Because of the cause referred to as *âhâra*, 

the results appear, and when it is understood by penetrative knowledge, then because of *avijjâ*, *kammaja rûpa* (*rûpa* produced by *kamma*) has resulted; the *avijjâ* is the cause, the *kammaja rûpa* the result, …. 

The causes and results are analytically recognized in this way— 

1. In the past too there were causes and results. 
1. In the future too there will be the causes and results. 
1. In the present also there are the causes and results. 

There  is  no  creator  other than  the  causes  and  consequences,  nor is there  any individual who has been created by a creator.  The cause and result of *rûpa*-*nâma* = only the *sankhâra dhamma* groups are there — determination has been made via *paccakkha ñâna* for which *vicikicchâ* in the past, future and the present  (doubtful state) can be overcome.  This is called ***ñâtapariññâ*** which can analytically recognize the *sankhâra*  *dhammas* such as 

1. *Rûpa dhamma* 
1. *Nâma dhamma* 
1. The cause 
1. The result 

` `which are objects of concentration for the insight knowledge (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.2: 241 – 242). 

In accordance with the opening of the doctrines, only when the causes and results of the past, the future and the present periods can be cultivated analytically can the 

` `*ñâtapariññâ* be acquired.  This fact must be obediently maintained. 

***Lokî Tîranapariññâ*** 

“*Rûpam aniccam*, *vedanâ aniccâ*”*tiâdinâ nayena tesamyeva dhammânam sâmañña- lakkhanam âropetvâ pavattâ lakkhanârammanikavipassanâ paññâ **tîranapariññâ** nâma.* 

R.  *Kalâpasammasanato pana patthâya yâva udayabbayânupassanâ tîranapariññâya  bhûmi* (*Visuddhi*-2: 241). 

The nature of the arising and dissolution of the *rûpa*  and *vedanâ* is discerned by knowledge and recognized as *anicca* (impermanance).”  In this way the five-fold *upâdâ*- *nakkhandhâ* and *rûpa*-*nâma dhammas* are discerned taking the three general characters such as *aniccalakkhanâ*, *dukkhalakkhanâ* and *anattalakkhanâ* are taken as the object.  In discerning  this  way  the  *vipassanâ*  knowledge  that   recognizes  the  *aniccalakkhanâ*, *dukkhalakkhanâ* and *anattalakkhanâ* as the object is ***tîranapariñña***.  R.  The *rûpa* and  *nâma dhammas* are discerned by 

1. Taking *rûpa* and *nâma* as individual group, taking it as two individual groups, or 
1. By five *khandha* way, taking these as five individual groups, or 
1. By 12 *âyatana* way, taking these as 12 individual groups, or 
1. By 18 element way, taking these as 18 individual groups. 

Method meditation on the three general characters of the individuals as groups is called the method of *kalâpasammasana*.  From that *kalâpasammasana* *ñâna* to the attain- ment of  *rûpa*-*nâma*-cause-result = arising and perishing away of the *sankhâra dhammas* are  concentrated  until  *paccuppanakhanan*  (momentary  present)  is  acquired.   The knowledge of mediatation on the three general characters is the *udayabbayânupassanâ  ñâna*.  This is the common abode of the ***tîranapariññâ*** (*Visuddhi*-2: 241). 

**The Three *Lokuttara Pariññâ*** 

*Yassamâ vâ ñâtatîranapariññâyopi tadatthâyeva*, *yassamâ ca ye dhamme pajahati*, *te niyamato ñâta ceva tîritâ ca honti*, *tassmâ pariññattayampi iminâ pariyâyena magga- ñânassa kiccanti veditabbam* (*Visuddhi*-2: 335). 

*Tassâ bhañgânupassanato patthâya yâva bhûmi*  (*Visuddhi*-2: 335).   The  *pahânapariññâ* is the field ranging from *bhañgânupassanâ ñâna*  to *ariyamagga ñâna*.  

*Nippariyâyena pahânapariññâ nâma maggañânanti* “*yâva maggañânâ bhûmî*”*ti vattam* (*Mahâtî*.-2: 508).  Definitely the *pahânapariññâ* is the *ariyamagga ñâna*.  That is the reason why *atthakathâ sayâtaw* has expounded the field up to the *vipassanâ* to be that  of the *pahânapariññâ*. 

Therefore, if stated in another way, the *ñâtapariññâ* and *tîranapariññâ* are for the *pahâna pariññâ* as a result.  *Ñâtapariññâ* and *tîranapariññâ* are arising  for the *ariya- magga ñâna* as a result.  The *kilesâ* clinging on to the five-fold *khandhâ nâma*-*rûpa* *dhamma*  are  completely  eradicated  by  *ariyamagga  dhamma*  via  *samuccheda*.  The *ariyamagga dhamma* has analytically understood these *dhammas* as the law of constancy. They have been investigated and have been determined to be *anicca*, *dukkha* and *antta*.  It should be noted that all the three  *pariññâ*s  are, taken literally, the function of the  *ariyamagga ñâna* (*Visuddhi*-2: 335).    

`         `What the above book of doctrines means is this.  The *ariyamagga dhamma*s possess the force to completely eradicate the *kilesâ*s hence definitely named *pahâpariññâ*.  The *vipassanâ ñâna*s possess the force to momentarily eradicate the *kilesâ*s, and because of this the  *ariyamagga dhammas* are definitely named  *pahânapariññâ*  and literally named  *ñâtapariññâ* and *tîranapariññâ*.  The reason for such a name is as follow. 

Because the *ariyamagga dhamma* can eradicate the *kilesâ*s completely, it gets the name ***pahâna***.  It is also named *pariññâ* as it can understand penetratively, by concen- tration on as object, and analytically, the *asankhata* element, *element of peacefulness the nibbâna dhamma*.  That is why the *ariyamagga dhamma* is definitely the *pahânapariññâ*.  As the *vipassanâ ñâna*s possess the force which can eradicate the *kilesâ*s momentarily, they are literally named as *pahânapariññâ*.   Furthermore the *ariyamagga dhamma* is  definitely named as  *pahânapariññâ*, whereas definitely, and literally also as *ñâtapariññâ*  and *tîranapariññâ*.  It is so because of the following reasons. 

The *ariyamagga dhamma* which, of necessity, eradicates the *kilesâ*s completely, and so is named ***pahâna***.**   The *asañkhata* element and element of peacefulness, *nibbâna* *dhamma*  which,  of  necessity  should  be  understood,  concentrated  penetratively  and analytically as the object for which it is named  *pariññâ*.   That is why the  *ariyamagga*  *dhamma* is definitely named *pahâna pariññâ*. 

The *ariyamagga dhamma* can penetratively visualize the four-fold noble truth via two *pativedha*s called the *ârammanapativedha* and *asammohapativedha*.  In these two, the *ârammanapativedha* refers to understanding the object of concentration penetratively. *Ariyamagga dhamma* can visualize the *nirodha saccâ dhamma*, called *asañkhata* element and the element of peacefulness, the *nibbâna dhamma*, analytically and  penetratively.  Because of this, the *ariyamagga dhamma* is also named as  *pariññâ*.  And so the  *ariya- magga dhamma* is nominated as the *pahânaparññâ*. 

The *ariyamagga dhamma* can penetratively understand the four noble truth by means of the two *pativedha*s called *ârammanapativedha* and *asammohapativedha*.  Of these two, the *arammanapativedha*  refers to its power of penetrative discernment of the object  of  concentration.   The  *ariyamagga  dhamma*  can  penetratively  visualize  the *asañkhata* element and the element of peacefulness, the *nibbâna dhamma* as the object. In this such visualization, *moha* and *avijjâ* which can hinder penetratively understanding  the four noble truth, have been eradicated completely.  From functional point of view, the knowledge of the four noble truth has been accomplished at the same time with this era- dication.   The knowledge of the four noble truth following the eradication of the  *moha*  and *avijjâ* is known as *asammohapativedha*. 

The  object,  of  concentration  by  way  *asammoha  pativedha*,  the  *vipassanâ* knowledge such as 

1. The five *upâdânakkhandha* = *dukkha saccâ dhamma*, existing as 11 species such as the past, the future, the present, *ijjatta*, *bahiddha*, *olârika*, *sukhuma*, *hîna*, *dûra* and *santika*, and 
1. The cause and its consequence, the causal relationship, which is the *samuppâda* called the *samudaya saccâ dhamma*** 

have been accomplished, and acquired simultaneously.  Hence literally the *ariyamagga*  *dhamma* is named as *ñâtapariññâ* also. 

Again,  the  *ariyamagga  dhamma*  has  eradicated  completely  the *moha*  =  *avijjâ* which hinder the understanding of the features of *anicca*, *dukkha* and *anatta* of the *dukkha saccâ dhamma* and *samudaya saccâ*.  At the same time the attainment of the investigative and analytical knowledge of the features of  *anicca*, *dukkha* and *anatta* of  the *dukkha saccâ dhamma* and *samudaya saccâ* has been accomplished. 

`        `Before acquirement of the *ariyamagga dhamma*, and during practicing on the *pubbabhâgapatipadâ* prior to *ariyamagga dhamma,* a meditator has to make effort to acquire the two *pariñña*s -- the *ñâtapriññâ* which analytically understands the features of  *anicca*,  *dukkha*  and  *anatta*  of  the  *dukkha  saccâ  dhamma*  and  *samudaya  saccâ dhamma*,  and  the  *tîranapariññâ*  which  understands  these  features  investigatively.   These two *pariññâ*s are concerned only with the attainment of ariyamagga dhammas  named the  *pahânapariññâ*, for which it literally means the  *ñâta pariññâ* and  *tîrana*- *pariññâ*. 

If the five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* and *rûpa-nâma dhamma* are not understood analytically by means of the three *lokîpariññâ*s and the three *lokuttarapariññâ*s there will be no end to suffering of the rounds of rebirth.  Only if these are understood ana- lytically will there an end to the suffering of the rounds of rebirth., as instructed by the Buddha in the above mentioned Parijânana Suttana.  Remember, with a clear conscious mind, that in such an analytical understanding are also included the five *upâdânakhan- dhâ*s of the past and of the future. 

In continuation ***Mahâvajîravipassanâ ñâna*** of the *Buddhisatta* will be described  as extracted from the Second volume of Mahâbuddhavañ. 

**The Bodhisatta exercised on sixtythree hundred millions of** ***Mahâvajîravipassanâ*** 

As stated in earlier sections, the characters of the *kilesâ*s such as *lobha*, *dosa* have been eradicated by virtue of *dâna* (charity) etc. of *kusala* *pâramî*, the *moha kilesâ* and its  associated  features,  which  could  hinder  the  journey  to  the  *nibbâna*,  are  also eradicated.  The Bodhisatta, who has accomplished all these, meditated on the *mahâ*- *vajîravipassanâ dhammas*  in the early morning of the full moon of Kason, the second  month of the year.  The way meditation exercised is given below in brief. 

At an age of authority, the three periods of  humans, celestial beings, *byammâ* and sentient beings residing in each of the solar system of a hundred million universes, and essence of the *dhamma* actually existing then are discerned by the Bodhisatta. The Bodhisatta realized that, however many there are of men, celestial beings, *byammâ*, in each of the universe, *avijjâ* and *sankhâra* (the cause of the past period) as the true *paramatthasabhâva  dhamma*,  *viññâna*,  *nâma*-*rûpa*,  *salâyatana*,  *phassa*  and  *vedanâ*  (the result of the present period),  *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *kamma bhava* (the cause of the present period) together with (the *upapatti bhava* as) *jâti*, *jarâ* + *marana* (the results of the future period).   The Bodhisatta well understood the   *paramatthasabhâva  dhamma*  referred to as the12 classes of  *paticca samuppâda*. 

When the Bodhisatta discerned on the essence of *paramatthasabhâva dhamma* existing in the three periods of men, celestial beings, *byammâ*, and sentient beings, the essence of the 12 features of *paticca samuppâda* such as *avijjâ*, *sankhâra*, *viññâna*, *nâma*-*rûpa*, *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedanâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *bhava jâti*,  *jarâ* + *marana* (the objects of *vipassanâ*) are well realized.  The discernment was made similarly of *paramatthasabhâva dhamma*s of the three periods of men, celestial beings, *byammâ*, and sentient beings in other solar systems.  When discerned in this way, Bodhisatta realized the 12 features of the  *paticca samuppâda*,  which are to be taken as the object  of concentration, similar to those of this solar system. 

When  the  Bodhisatta  concentrated  on  the  essence  of  the  *paramatthasabhâva* *dhamma* of series of *khandhâ* of men, celestial beings, *byammâ*, and sentient beings in the three periods in this a hundred million universe called the age of authority, the Bhodhisatta  realized  the  groups  of  *dhamma*  which  are  to  be  taken  as  object  of *vipassanâ* concentration by virtue of His knowledge.  These objects are hundreds of millions of *avijjâ*, *sankhâra*, *viññâna*, *nâma*-*rûpa,* *salâyatana*, *phassa*, *vedanâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *bhava jâti*,  *jarâ*  +  *marana*  (when these 12 are added),  the  *vipassanâcâra*  (objects to be concentrated) which add up to 12 hundred million in all. 

To eradicate the fifteen hundred tangling factors of *kilesâ*, the Bodhisatta entered the *ânâpâna* jânic state (= entered the fourth janic state of *ânâpâna*) to sharpen the knowledge of Mahâvajira vipassana as a bush clearer would use his sharpened dagger to  cut  away  the  diffusedly  growing  brushes.   After  entering  this  janic  state  the Bodhisatta analysed each and every factor, numbering 12 hundred million in all, of the *paticca samuppâda* taking one by one their feature of *anicca*, *dukkha* and *anatta* as  the object. 

Therefore of 12 hundred million factors of *paticca samuppâda*, each has three knowledge such as  *aniccavipassanâ nana*,  *dukkhavipassanâ nana*, and *anattavipas- sanâ nana*, and totally there will be** sixtythree hundred millions in all. 

(This Mahâvijaravipassanâ ñâna in brief has been describe in the opening of Uparipannâtîkâ anupada, page 275, and in that 3rd vol. Mahâkahndhaka sâriputtamogalâ- na pabbjjâ, page 229, of Vinisâratthadîpanîtîkâ). 

Every Bodhisatta, when about to attain full enlightenment, naturally analyze the *paticca* *samuppâda dhamma* forward and backward.  Our Bodhisatta, in a similar way to the  predecessors, has analyze the *paticca samuppâda* in details.  Then the whole solar system with its ten thousand *lokadhâtu*s trembled.  

Similar to the nature of every Buddhas = (of every Bodhisattas), the Bodhisatta, after acquiring the 36 thousand millions of *mahâvipassanâ sammasana nana* of the 12 species of *paticca samuppâda*, entered the fourth jhanic state of *ânâpâna*.  (It is the act of sharpening the knowledge of *udayabbaya nana* etc. of higher knowledge of *vipassanâ nana* at the fourth *jhanic* state of *ânâpâna samâpatta*).  After entering the fourth jhanic state of *ânâpâna* (= after sharpening the higher *vipassanâ nana*), the Bodhisatta acquired the *udayabbaya ñâna* etc. of the higher *vipassanâ* *ñâna* in the  *dhamma* groups of the five  *khandhâs* with ease. 

(It must be noted that as the Bodhisatta, after being ordained  and learning the three  Pitakas,  has  exercised  on  *vipassanâ*  to  attain  *udayabbaya  ñâna*,  *bhañga  ñâna*, *bhaya ñâna*, *âdînava ñâna*, *nibbidâ ñâna*, *muccitukamayattâ ñâna*, *patisankhâ ñâna* and *sankhârûpekkhâ ñâna*, and  the force of knowledge in meditation by means of 36 hundred million *mahâvijaravipassanâ sammasana ñâna* as mentioned above, have been so great,  the above *vipassanâ nanas* are attained without difficulty.  Ref.   Jînâlañkâratîkâ p. 55). 

This is about the Mahâvajiravipassanâ ñâna in Mahâbhuddavañ vol. II, pp. 334-338. 

**Extracts from *Bodhikathâ*** 

The  Bodhisatta,  after  conquering  the  *devaputtamâra*  before  the  sunset  on  the fullmoon day of Kason, in the year (of Mahâsakkarâja),  103, acquired the *pubbenivâsâ- nussati abhiññâna* in the early part of that night, *dibbacakkhuabiññâna* at *majjhimayâma* and *âsavakkhaya ñâna* at *pacchimayâma* and finally attained the Buddhahood. 

Then the Buddha, sitting cross-legged on the *Aparâjita* throne at the base of the bo tree, enjoyed the mental ease of *arahattaphala* and *vimutti*.  On the early , middle and last parts of the night of a day after the full moon of  Kason,  the Buddha took to the heart  

the following. 

*Avijjâpaccayâ sankhâra*, *sankhârapaccaya viññânam*.  R.  *Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa samudayo hoti*.  *Avijjâyatveva asesaviraganirodhâ sanhâranirdohâ*, *sankhâranirodha viññânanirodho*.  R.  *Evametassa kevalassa dukkhakkhandhassa  nirodho hoti*  (*Vi*.-3:1). 

`        `Because of *avijjâ*, *sankhâra*s are formed; because of *sankhâra viññâna* is formed. R.  In this way the nature of cause and result of this mass of *dukkha*, in no way associated with *sukha*, become apparent.  Because of *arahattamagga*, *avijjâ* alone ceases utterly*  and so does *sankhâra*.  Because of cessation of *samkhâra*, *viññâna* ceases.  R.  In this way, nature of cessation of this mass of *dukkha*, in no way associated with *sukha*, become  clear (*Vi*.-3:1). 

In this way by the process of *samsâra vatta dukkha* referred to as ***anuloma***, by the process of dissolution of *samsâra vatta dukkha* referred to as the ***patiloma*,** the *paticca*  *samuppâda dhamma* was taken to the heart by the Buddha. 

After analyzing the *paticca samuppâda* forward and backward and after taking it to the heart proclaimed the first *udânagâthâ* during the early part of the night*,* and the second *udânagâthâ* during the middle and the third *udânagâthâ* during the last part of the  night.  In this case Vinayamahâvaggaatthakathâ explained in the following way. 

*Bhagavâ hi visâkhapunnamâya rattiyâ pathamayâme pubbenivâsam anussari*, *majjhimayâme dibbacakkhum visodhesi*, *pacchimayâme paticca samuppâdam anuloma-*

*patilomam manasi katvâ “idâni karuno uggamissatî”ti sabbanutam pâpuni*.  *Sabbanu- tappatthisamanantarameva ca aruno uggacchi*, *tato tam divasam teneva pallañkena* 

*vitinâmattvâ sampattâya pâtipadarattiyâ tîsu yâmesu evum mansi katvâ imâni udânâni  udânesi* (*Vi*.-*Tha*.-3: 237). 

Buddha (= the Bodhisatta) during the first part of the night of fullmoon of Kason, in the year (of Mahâsakkarâja), 103, reviewed on the series of khandhâs of the previous life by means of *pubbenivâsânussati abiññâna*.  In the middle part of the night clearness of *dibbacakkhu abiññâna* was accomplished.  When *paticca samuppâda* was concen- trated  forward  and  backward,  and  taken  heart  during  the  last  part  of  the  night  Full Enlightenment was acquired at a “time when the dawn was about to have arrived.”  After the full enlightenment was attained, the dawn has occurred.  Whiling away by sitting  cross-legged during, after and a day later, a day of emergence = a day after the full moon day of Kason has arrived.  Then the nature of *paticca samuppâda* was taken to heart,  reviewing forward and backward, and proclaimed following *udânagâthâ*. 

1. *Yadâ have pâtubhavunti dhamma*, *âtâpino châyato byâmanassa*. 

*Athassa kañkhâ vapayanti sabbâ*, *yato pajânâti sahetudhammam* (*Vi*.-3: 2). 

*Ãtâpino* =  *samappadhâna*  which possesses  power  to  streneously  ardently the 1500 species of *kilesa*s.  *Châyato* = various kinds of *samatha* object such as *ânâpâna* etc.,  and  firm  and  strong  concentration  power  in  discerning  fixedly  on  the  general characters of *anicca,* *dukkha* and *anatta* of the *sankhâra dhamma* to attain *jhânamagga*. Or due to forceful concentration.  *Bhyâmanassa* = as all ill-deeds have been detached (condoned) in the *santâna* of the Lord Rahantâ named Visuddhibhyâmana.  *Yadâ* = at that  moment.   *Dhammâ*  =  37  speceis  of  *bodhipakkhiya  dhamma*s.   *Have*  =  in  fact. *Pâtubhavunti* = have arisen clearly.  *Yato* = as the 37 species of *bodhipakkhiya dhamma*s have  arisen  clearly.   *Sahetudhammam*  =  *avijjâ*  etc.  as  the  causes  together  with  the resultant  *sankhâra*  etc.  such  as  the  mass  of  *dukkha*  are.   *Pajânâti*  =  understood analytically and penetratively by means of *vipassanâpaññâ* and *maggapaññâ*.  *Atha* = when *paticcadhâtu samuppâda* is clearly and definitely visualized in this way.  *Assa* = in the *santâna* of the *rahantâ*.  *Sabbâ* = completely.  *Kañkhâ* = because of wrong view on and ignorance of the *paticca samuppâda*, 16 species of wrong view on the  *rûpa*-*nâma dhamma*  occurring in three periods.  *Vapayanti* = *viapayanti* = perished like the snow 

` `melting away in the sun. 

2. *Yadâ have pâtubhavunti dhamma*,  *âtâpino jhâyato bhyâmanassa*. 

*Athassa kankhâ vapayanti sabbâ*, *yato khayam paccayâbam avedi* (*Vi*.-3: 2). 

*Âtâpino* = *samappadhâna* which possesses power to streneously depress the 1500 species of *kilesa*s.  *Châyato* = various kinds of *samatha* object such as *ânâpâna* etc., and firm and strong concentration power in visualizing fixedly on the general characters of *anicca,* *dukkha* and *anatta* of the *sankhâra dhamma* to attain *jhânamagga*. Or because of forceful concentration. *Bhyâmanassa* = as all ill-deeds have been detached in the *santâna* of the Lord *Rahantâ* named Visuddhibhyâmana.  *Yadâ* = at that moment.  *Dhammâ* = 37 speceis of *bodhipakkhiya dhamma*s.  *Have* = in fact. *Pâtubhavunti* = have arisen clearly.  *Yato* = as the 37 species of *bodhipakkhiya dhamma*s have arisen clearly. *Paccayânam* = of the causes such* as *avijjâ* etc. *Khayam* = *asañkkhata nibbâna dhamma* where (*avijjâ*) have ceased.  *Avedi* = has come to underastand clearly and penetratively.  *Atha* = where  

those causes have been annihilated = when *asankhatadhâtu*, the element of peacefulness  *nibbâna dhamma* named *paccayakkhaya* is understood clearly.  *Assa* = in the *santâna* of the *rahantâ*.  *Sabbâ* = completely.  *Kañkhâ* = because of ignorance of the *asañkhatadhâtu* the element of peacefulness,* the *nibbâna dhamma*,  wrong view *dhamma* groups that would have appeared in the interior. *Vapayanti* = *viapayanti* = perished like the snow  melting away in the sun. 

3. *Yadâ have pâtubhavunti dhamma*, *âtâpino châyato byâmanassa*. *Vidhûpayam titthati mârasenam*, *suriyova obhâsayamantalikkham* (*Vi*.-3: 2). 

*Ãtâpino* = *samappadhâna* which possesses power to streneously depress the 1500 species of *kilesa*s.  *Châyato* = various kinds of *samatha* object such as *ânâpâna* etc., and  firm and strong concentration power in visualizing fixedly on the general characters of *anicca,* *dukkha* and *anatta* of the *sankhâra dhamma* to attain *jhânamagga*. Or because of forceful  concentration.  .  *Bhyâmanassa*  =  as  all  ill-deeds  have  been  detached  in  the *santâna*  of  the  Lord  *Rahantâ*  named  Visuddhibhyâmana.   *Yadâ*  =  at  that  moment.  *Dhammâ* = 37 speceis of *bodhipakkhiya dhamma*s.  *Have* = in fact. *Pâtubhavunti* = have clearly arisen.  (Tadâ = then, at that time) *Sûriyo* = the sun which has arisen from over the edge of Mount Yugandhora.   *Antalikkham*  =  the *ajatâ* plane, the sky is.  *Obhâsayam* =  *Obhâsayato* = shining with its thousand radiations  and lightening (the sky) moving the darkness away.  *Titthati iva* = existing.  (*So byâmano* = the noble *rahantâ*.  *Tehi dham*- *mehi* = with those 37 species of *bodhipakkhiya dhammas*).  *Mârasenam* = a force of 10 lines  of  mâra  of  *kâmarâga*  are.   *Vidhûpayam*  =  *Vidhûpayanto*  =  destroyed  utterly.  *Titthati* = brilliant with knowledge like the brilliantly shining sun (*Vi*.-3: 2).  

(*Mahâbuddhavañ*-*Du*: 357 – 361). 

Here, it must be noted that “the Buddha, during the life of a Bodhisatta and before the attainment of the Buddhahood, the *paticca samuppâda* was analytically concentrated in a similar way.” 

**Extracts from Gotamakacetiyasuttan** 

The 500 monks, who have entered world of *sâsanâ* from the life of bhâmana and who were experts in horology, learnt the *pariyatti dhamma* without difficulty.  For this reason *mâna* have appeared in their *santâna*.  The Buddha realized that this *mâna* is an impedement to acquirement of *arahattaphala*.  So the Buddha preached ***Mûlapariyâya- suttan*** (*Ma*.-1: 1) and ***Mûlapariyâyajâta*** (*Jâtaka*-*Ttha*.-2: 237) to these 500 monks so as to deplete them of their *mâna*. When it was done with, the monks exercised on *vipassanâ*,  *samatha* and *bhâvanâ*, the *indare* in their *santâna* become mature, and when the maturity is so attained, the Buddha expatiated this  *Gotamacetiyasuttan*  at the  *Gotamakacetî*  in  *Vesâlî*. 

*Abhiññâyâham bhikkhave dhammam desemi no anabiññâya*, *sanidânâham bhikkhave dhammam desemi no anidânam*, *sappâtihâriyâham dhammam desemi no appâtihâriyam*. *Tassa mahsam bhikkhave abiññâya dhammam desayato no anabiññâya sanidânam dhammam desayato no anidânam appâtihâriyam dhammam desayato no appâtihâriyam karanîyo ovâdo karanîyâ anussâsanî*, *alañca pana vo bhikkhave tutthiyâ alam attamanatâya alam somanassâya* “*sammâsambuddho bhagavâ*, *savekkhâto dhammo*,  *suppatipanno samgho*”*ti*  (*Am*.-1: 280). 

Bhikkhave …. I preach only after understanding the *dhamma* penetratively by means of  *paccakha ñâna*.  I do not preach without understanding the *dhamma* penetra- tively by means of *paccakha ñâna*.  I only preach the *dhamma* with *nidâna*, but not the one without *nidâna*.  Bhikkhave …. I only preach the *dhamma* that possesses the force to dispel  the  one  that  is  opposite,  but  not  the  one  without  this  force.   Now  I  have admonished this  *ovâda dhamma*  once to you, and have made repeated admonishing  *anusâsanî* to you all. 

Bhikkhus … you all should willing accept the fact that 

\1. The Buddha is endowed with *sammâsambuddha guna* by which the five-fold 

` `*ñeyadhamma*  called  *sankhâra*,  *vikâra*,  *lakkhana*,  *nibbâna*  and  *paññatta*   are understood by *sayambhûñân*.*a*, a  kno.wledge acquired by himself, without the assitance. of anyone, and which .has the ability to visualize penetratively. 

1. The Buddha is endowed with *savekkhâta gu*.*na* by which the 10-fold *dhamma* as  *Maggaphala*,  *Nibbâna*,  *Dhammakkhan*  are  admonished,  from  beginning 

through middle to the end, apprehensively. 

2. The eight noble disciples are endowed with *suppa*.*tipanna gun*. *a* by which the *niyânika dhamma* are obediently exercised so as to escape from the *samsâra*- 

`      `*vatta*. 

The Buddha has preached that it should be willingly accepted, should have mind  to accept heartily, and should have clear *somanassa* to happily accept (*Am*.-1: 280). 

*Imassamim ca pana veyâkaranassamim bhaññâmâne sahassî lokadhâtu akampitta* 

(*Am*.-1: 280).* 

As this ***Gotamakacetiyasuttan*** *desana* was delivered in simple language, but not  in *gâthâ*,  the earth in a thousand *lokadhâtu* trembled violently (*Am*.-1: 280). 

*Idañca suttam sutvâ pañcasatâ bhikkhu tassamamyevâsane saha patisambhidâhi  arahattam pâpunamsu* (*Ma*.-*Tha*.-1: 61) 

`        `After listening to this *gotamacetiyasuttan*, the 500 monks attained the *arahattaphala*  together with the four-fold *patisambhidâ ñâna* there and then. 

This is the *suttana* for which even the non-living earth, situated in a thousand *dhâtu*, stands in support of its truth.  If you, as a living *saviññânaka* complete with clever mind and knowledge, can stand in support of the truth as does the earth, then you have  approached the main path of *magga* leading to *nibbâna*. 

Here, in this explanation emphasis is put on the process of *sankhâra loka* called *lokasamudaya* = *anulomapaccayâkâra* =  *anulomapaticca samuppâda dhamma* and the process  of  cessation  of  *sankhâra  loka*  =  *patilomapaccayâkâra*  =  *patilomapaticca samuppâda  dhamma*.   The  Buddha,  as  a  Bodhitassa  during  the  night  when  about  to acquire the Buddhahood,  meditated on the nature of *paticca samuppâda* via *vipassanâ ñâna*  called  *paccakkha  ñâna*  by  way  of  *anulomapatiloma*  (*Vi*.-*Ttha*.-3:  237).   After attaining  the  Buddhahood  too*  the  nature  of  *paticca  samuppâda*  was  meditated  and analyzed forward and backward by  *anulomapatiloma*.   With regard to this the Buddha  has noted in the *Buddhavañ* this way. 

[Here it should be noticed that in knowledge of the Buddha, although  all the *dhammas* have been visualized in all possible features (even as a Bodhisatta on the night when the Buddhahood was to have attained), and when the exercise was primarily on the  *paticca samuppâda*, *vipassanâ* was taken to the heart.  And that the *dhamma* of *paticca* *samuppâda* was deep, subtle and heard to visualize.  Therefore, only the process of the arising and dissolution of  *paticca samuppâda*  was discerned to be the the process of  *sansârvatta dukkha*.] (*Mahâbuddhavañ*, Vol 2: 356). 

Only  after  visualizing  penetratively  by  himself,  the  Buddha  admonished  the *sansâravatta dukkha* = process of arising and of perishing away of *sankhâraloka* referred  to as *anulomapatiloma paticca samuppâda dhamma* to his disciples.  That the disciples could understand as instructed has been expatiated by the Buddha in the *suttan*s of which  the second *ariyasâvakasuttan* is given.  

**The Second *Ariyasâvakasuttana*** 

*Na bhikkhave sutavato ariyasâvakassa evum hoti* “*kim nu kho – kissamam sati kim hoti*, *Kissuppâdâ kim uppjjati*, *kissamam sati sankhârâ honti*, *kissamam sati viññânam* *hoti*, *kissamam sati nâma-rûpam hoti*, *kissamam sati salâyatanam hoti*, *kissamam sati phasso hoti*, *kissamam sati vedanâ hoti*, *kissamam sati tahnâ hoti*, *kissamam sati upâdânam hoti*,  *kissamam sati bhavo hoti*, *kissamam sati jâti hoti*, *kissamam sati jarâmaranam hotî”ti*.  

*Atha kho bhikkhave sutavato ariyasâvakassa aparappaccayâ ñânamevatte hoti* “*ímasamam sati idam hoti*, *imassuppâdâ idam upajjati*, *avijjâya sati sankhârâ honti*, 

*sankhâresu sati ñânam hoti*, *viññâne sati nâma-rûpam hoti*, *nâma-rûpe sati salâyatanam hoti*, *salâyatane sati phasso hoti*, *phasse sati vedanâ hoti*, *vedanâya sati tahnâ hoti*, 

*salâyatane sati upâdânam hoti*, *upâdâne sati bhavo hoti*, *bhave sati jâti hoti*, *jâtiyâ sati  jarâmaranam hotî”ti*.  *So*  *evum pajânâti “evamayam loko samudayatî”ti*. 

*Na bhikkave sutavato ariyasâvakassa evum hoti “kim nu kho – kissamam asati kim na hoti*, *kissa nirodhâ kim nirucchati*, *kassamam asati samkhârâ na honti*, *kissamam asati viññânam hoti*, *kissamam asati nâma-rûpam na hoti*, *kissamam asati salâyatanam na hoti*, *kissamam asati phasso na hoti*, *kissamam asati vedanâ na hoti*, *kissamam asati  tahnâ na hoti*.  R.  *Upâdânam*,  *Bhavo*.  *Jâti*. *Kissamam asati jarâmaranam na hotî”ti*. 

*Atha kho bhikkhave sutavato ariyasâvakassa aparappaccayâ ñânamevatta hoti* “*imassamam asati idam nahot*, *imassa nirodhâ imam nirucchati*, *avijjâya asati sankhârâ na honti*, *sankhâresu asati viññânam na hoti*, *viññâne asati nâma-rûpam na hoti*, *nâma-*

*rûpe asati salâyatanam na hoti*.  R.  *Jâtiyâ asati jarâmaranam na hotî*”*ti*.  *So evum  pajânâti* “*evamayam loko nirucchatî*”*ti*. 

*Yato kho bhikkhave ariyasâvako evum lokassa samudayañca attañgamañca yathâbhûtam pajânâti*.  *Ayam vuccati bhikkhave ariyasâvako ditthisampanno itipi*, *dassanasampanno itipi*, *âgato imam saddhamam itipi*, *passati imam saddhamam itipi*, *sakkhena ñânena samannâgato itipi*, *sakkhâya vijjâya samannâgato itipi*, *dhamma sotam samâpanno itipi*,  *ariyo nibbedhikapañño itipi*, *samatadvâram âhicca titthati itipîti* (*Sam*.-1: 306-308). 

***Apparapaccayâ**ti na parappaccayena*, *aññassa appatiyâyetvâ attapaccakkhañâname- vassa ettha hotîti* (*Sam.-Ttha.*-2: 32). 

***Na parappaaccayanâ**ti parassa asaddahanena* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 38). 

Bhikkhus …. There are two kinds of knowledge: one acquired after being taught called *âgamsuta* and the other self-acquired through practice, called *adhigamsuta*.  In the *santâna* of my noble *sâvaka* who is endowed with these two, there will not arise, in his mind, such thought as “How?  Which *dhamma* would arise when a certain *dhamma* is in existence clearly?  Which is the *dhamma* due to the existence of which there would arise a *dhamma*? 

What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising of the *sankhâra*s ?  What are the *dhammas* that would cause arising of *viññâna*?  What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising  of  the  *nâma-rûpa*?   What  are  *dhamma*s  that  would  cause  the  arising  of  the *salâyatana*?  What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising of the *phassa*? What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising of the *vedanâ*? What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising of the *tahnâ*?  What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising of the *upâdâna*?  What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising of the *bhava*?  What are *dhamma*s that would cause the arising of the  *jâti*?  What are  *dhamma*s  that would cause  the arising of the *jarâmarana*? 

No such a thought ever comes across his mind.  Bhikkhus …. In fact, in the *santâna* of  my noble  disciple  who  is  possessed  of  the  two  kinds  of  knowledge,  one acquired after being taught called *âgamsuta* and the other self-acquired through practice, called *adhigamsuta*, there would arise only the penetratively visualizing ***aparappaccaya ñâna*** = ***attapaccakkha ñâna***.   This knowledge enables the *sâvaka* to  understand the cause-result relationship = *anulomapaticca samuppâda dhamma* penetratively by his own  self, with respect in this case to the fact that there is no one but self to rely upon. 

If this cause is really in existence, there will be a clear result.  It is because of this cause that the resultant has arisen. – If there is *avijja* as a cause, there will be *sankhâra* as a resultant.  If there is *sankhâra* as a cause, there will be *viññâna* as a resultant.  If there is *viññâna* as a cause, there will be *nâma-rûpa* as a resultant.  If there is *nâma-rûpa* as a cause, there will be *salâyatana* as a resultant. If there is *salâyatana* as a cause, there will be *phassa* as a resultant.* If there is *phassa* as a cause, there will be *vedanâ* as a resultant. If there is *vedanâ* as a cause, there will be *tahnâ* as a resultant. If there is *tahnâ* as a cause, there will be *upâdâna* as a resultant.  If there is *upâdânaa* as a cause, there will be *bhava* as a resultant.  If there is *bhava* as a cause, there will be *jâti* as a resultant.  If there  is *jâti* as a cause, there will be *jarâ* + *marana*  as a resultant. 

This is the only kind of knowledge the *sâvaka* will have.  That noble *sâvaka* of mine would come to differentially know as “This is way the *sankhâra loka* arises”  by  means of ***aparappaccaya ñâna*** = ***attapaccakkha ñâna***. 

Bhikkhus ….  In the *santâna* of my noble disciple who is endowed with two kinds of knowledge, the *âgamsuta* and *adhigamsuta*, not a single thought ever comes across his mind – “How come?  ?  Which *dhamma* would not arise when a certain *dhamma* is not in existence clearly?  The cessation  (by way of *anuppâdanirodha*)  which  *dhamma*  would  cause the dissolution of corresponding resultant *dhamma*? –  

Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *sankhâra*s would not arise? Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *viññâna* would not arise?   Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *nâma-rûpa* would not arise?  Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *salâyatana* would not arise?   Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *phassa* would not arise? Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *vedanâ* would not arise?   Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *tahnâ* would not arise? Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *upâdâna* would not arise?  Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which  the *bhava* would not arise?  Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *jâti* would not arise?  Which are the *dhamma*s due to the absence which the *jarâ* + *marana*  would not arise? 

This kind of thought never crosses his mind. In fact, in the *santâna* of my noble disciple who is possessed of the two kinds of knowledge, one acquired after being taught called *âgamsuta* and the other self-acquired through practice, called *adhigamsuta*, there would  arise  only  the penetratively visualizing ***aparappaccaya  ñâna***  =  ***attapaccakkha ñâna***.  This knowledge enables the *sâvaka* to understand the the cessation of the cause- result relationship = *patilomapaticca samuppâda dhamma* penetratively by his own self,  with respect in this case to the fact that there is no one but only self to rely upon. 

If  this  cause  has  not been  clearly  in existence,  there  could  not be  a  resultant *dhamma*; due to cessation (by *anuppâdanirodha dhamma*) of this cause, the result ceases  (by *anuppâdanirodha dhamma*). 

If there is no *avijjâ* as a cause, there will be no *sankhâra* as a result. If there is no *sankhâra* as a cause, there will be no *viññâna* as a result. If there is no *viññâna* as a cause, there will be no *nâma-rûpa* as a result. If there is no *nâma-rûpa* as a cause, there will be no *salâyatana* as a result. If there is no s*alâyatana* as a cause, there will be no *phassa* as a result. If there is no *phassa* as a cause, there will be no *vedanâ* as a result. If there is no *vedanâ* as a cause, there will be no *tahnâ* as a result. If there is no *tahnâ* as a cause, there will be no *upâdâna* as a result. If there is no *aupâdâna* as a cause, there will be no *bhava* as a result.  If there is no  *bhava*  as a cause, there will be no  *jâti* as a result. If there is no  *jâti* as a cause, there will be no *jarâ* + *marana* as a result. 

This is the only knowledge the *sâvaka* has in mind. That noble *sâvaka* of mine would come to differentially know as “This is way the  *sankhâra loka*  ceases (by way of  *anuppâdanirodha dhamma*)”  by means of ***aparappaccaya ñâna*** = ***attapaccakkha ñâna***. 

Bhikkhus …. Then, in this way my noble *sâvaka* understands differentially as “this is the way of arising and and of cessation of the *sankhâra loka*” via ***aparappaccaya ñâna*** = ***attapaccakkha ñâna***. Bhikkhus …. At that time my noble *sâvaka* unerringly understands,  via  ***aparappaccaya  ñâna***  =  ***attapaccakkha  ñâna***,  the  true  nature  of  the arising and cessation of the *sankhâra loka*.  Bhikkhus …. Then this noble *sâvaka* of mine is  recognized  as  one  endowed  with  ***sammâditthi***,  with  right  *dassana  ñâna*,  who  has attained the *dhamma* of good deeds called *saddhama*, who has acquired the vision of the *dhamma* of good deeds called *saddhama*, who is endowed with still practicing *sakkha ñâna* vision, who is endowed with still practicing *vijjâ ñâna*, one who has attained the *dhamma* called *dhammasota*, one endowed with *nibbedhikapaññâ* (called *vipassanpaññâ* *maggapaññâ*)  which is clean and superior and which can annihilate the mass of  *kilesa*,  and one who is at the door of *nibbâna* (*Sam*.-1: 306-308). 

As the *nâma*-*rûpapariccheda ñâna* to *sammâditthi* are admonished by the Buddha himself, the  *lokiyavipassanâsammâditthi*  and  *lokuttaramaggasammâditthi*  are together  expatiated as the *sammâditthi* (*Sam*.-*Ttha*.-2: 32; *Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 38). 

Therefore, in this Suttana from aspect of *sakkha* — ***sakkho**ti puthujjanakalayâna-* 

*kena saddham satta ariyâ tisso sikkhâ sikkhanti sikkhâ* (*Abhi*.-*Ttha*.-2: 315).— In accor- dance with the opening of this *kalayânaputhujjana* and the seven lower *ariyâ* individuals should be called *sakkha* individuals who are still practicing the three features of *sikkhâ* called *sîla*, *samâdhi* and *paññâ*.  Because of this, it should be noted, *kalayânaputhujana* individual, endowed with *vipassanâsammâditthi ñâna* vision, is also included among the  *sikkha* individuals. 

`            `In this *suttana*  the Buddha himself has stated that the *kalayânaputhujjana* toge- ther with *sikkhâariyâ* indivuals penetratively understand, by means of ***aparappaccaya ñâna***  =  ***attapaccakkha  ñâna***,  the  process  of  arising  of  the  *sankhâraloka*,  called *lokasamudaya*,  and  of  cessation  of  *sankhâraloka*,  called  *lokanirodha*.   Similarly  the disciples  have  admitted  to  each  other,  during  discussion  on  the  *lokasamudaya*  and *lokanirodha*, that they understand these processes penetratively.  These are mentioned in  the *pitakas* clearly.  Now some extracts from *kosambisuttan* will be presented.  

**Extracts from *Kosambisuttan*** 

Once the venerable Musila, Pavittha, Nârada, Ãnandâ were whiling at the *Ghositâ* monastry in the country of  *Kosambi*.  Then the venerable Pavittha put some questions to the venerable Musila.  The venerable Musila duely answered the questions. The questions  and answers are as follows. 

*Aññattareva âvuso pavittha saddhâya aññattara ruciyâ aññattara anussavâ aññattara âkâraparivitakkâ aññattara ditthinijjhânakhantiyâ atthâyassamato musilassa  paccattameva ñânam* “*jâtipaccayâ jarâmaranan*”*ti*. 

*Aññattareva âvuso musila saddhâya aññattara ruciyâ aññattara anussavâ aññattara âkâraparivitakkâ aññattara ditthinijjhânakhantiyâ ahametam jânâm ahametam passâmi*  “*jâtipaccayâ jarâmaranan*”*ti* (*Sam*.-1.: 336). 

*Thero pana pañcapi etâni kâranâni patikkhapitvâ paccakkhañânena patividdhbhâvum  pucchanto **aññattareva âvuso musila saddhâyâ**tiâdomâha* (*Sam.-Ttha*.-2: 113). 

**Question** — My Lord Musila …. 

1. *Saddhâ* = belief in others, 
1. *Ruci*  =  One’s own confidence born out of self thinking, 
1. *Anussava*  =  reasonable knowledge obtained from others, 
1. *Ãkâparivitakka*  =  careful considerable on the characters, 
1. *Ditthinijjhânakkhanti*  =  devotion towards the tought acquired just by thinking. 

Is there ***paccakkhaññâna*** that understands the fact that because of *jâti* as the cause, except the above five, *jarâmarana* arises? 

**Answer** — My Lord Pavittha …. 

1. *Saddhâ* = belief in others, 
1. *Ruci*  =  One’s own confidence born out of self thinking, 
1. *Anussava*  =  reasonable knowledge obtained from others, 
1. *Ãkâparivitakka*  =  careful considerable on the characters, 
1. *Ditthinijjhânakkhanti*  =  devotion towards the tought acquired just by thinking. 

Yes I know there is ***paccakkhaññâna*** that understands the fact that because of *jâti*  as the cause, except the above five, *jarâmarana* arises (*Sam*.-1: 336-337). 

Upto arising of *sankhâra* *dhammas* due to *avijjâ* were asked similarly, and the answers were made similarly.  Again the process of cessation of  *sankhâra dhamma*  was  asked. 

*Aññattareva  âvusso  musila  saddhâya  aññattara  ruciyâ  aññattara  anussavâ aññattara âkâraparivitakkâ aññattara ditthinijjhânakkhantiyâ atthâyassamato musilassa paccattameva ñânam* “*jâtinirodhâ jarâmarananirodho*”*ti*.  *Ãññattareva âvusso  pavittha saddhâya  aññattara  ruciyâ  aññattara  anussavâ  aññattara  âkâraparivitakkâ  aññattara ditthinijjhânakkhantiyâ ahametam jânâmi ahametam passâmi* “*jâtinirodhâ  jarâmarananirodho*”*ti* (*Sam*.1: 337). 

Question — My Lord Musila …. 

1. *Saddhâ* = belief in others, 
1. *Ruci*  =  One’s own confidence born out of self thinking, 
3. *Anussava*  =  reasonable knowledge obtained from others, 
3. *Ãkâparivitakka*  =  careful considerable on the characters, 
3. *Ditthinijjhânakkhanti*  =  devotion towards the tought acquired just by thinking 

Is there ***paccakkhaññâna*** that understands the fact that because the *jâti* ceases (by way of *anuppâdanirodha dhamma*), with the exception of the above five, *jarâmarana*  ceases (by way of *anuppâdanirodha dhamma*)? 

**Answer** — My Lord Pavittha …. 

1. *Saddhâ* = belief in others, 
1. *Ruci*  =  One’s own confidence born out of self thinking, 
1. *Anussava*  =  reasonable knowledge obtained from others, 
1. *Ãkâparivitakka*  =  careful considerable on the characters, 
1. *Ditthinijjhânakkhanti*  =  devotion towards the tought acquired just by thinking. 

Yes I know that there is ***paccakkhaññâna*** that understands the fact that because the *jâti* ceases (by way of *anuppâdanirodha dhamma*), with exception of the above five,  *jarâmarana* ceases (by way of *anuppâdanirodha dhamma*).  (*Sam*.1: 337). 

Up to cessation of  *avijjâ* and of *sankhâra* *dhammas* were asked similarly, and the answers were made similarly.    Here explanations contained in the *atthakathâ tîkâ* will  be presented in continuation. 

1. ***Saddhâ*** – some people believe in what others said, and would repeat what he has 

heard.  He takes it as the truth.  The he is the one who is dependent upon others, his knowledge is that of other’s, and, in a way, he ends up at other’s mouth.  He is the kind of  person without analyzing capability. 

2. ***Ruci*** – the other kind of person is the one who thinks about something by himself. 

He would think to his liking as “this will arise by itself, not due to other factors.”  He would not rely on others with regard to this and would take it to his heart’s liking and as  the truth. 

3. ***Anussava*** –  still the other kind of person would ask “How does this factor arise? 

Why does this arise?  This factor arises in this way; this factor arises because of this cause.—He would have heard it this way from predecessors.  It has been heard so since a long time ago.  This is the truth.  This factor is just the right one”.  What he has heard from others is taken to be true.  He is another kind of person who ends up at other’s  mouth. 

4. ***Ãkâraparivitakka*** –  while thinking as this factor may have arisen this way, a factor 

he has thought appear in his citta for every material.  He is the fourth kind of person who would take into his mind as if what he has thought really exists and is the truth.  This is the person without practical experience, who has come to a dead end by just thinking. 

5. ***Ditthinicchânakkhanti*** – a fifth kind of person is the one who is considering on a 

causative factor, and a certain result occurs while doing so.  He firmly believes in it, and takes to heart of the fact that there is no other result.  In such a person a kind of firm and determined belief, called *abhinivesa*,  occurs.   In his thought, concentrated on this cause, a kind of contendment and satisfaction appears.  This person will willingly accept – “This cause really exists”, just by thought. This is the** *Ditthinicchânakkhanti* (*Sam*.-*Ttha*.-2:122;  *Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 122). 

It has been asked if the process of arising of *sankhâraloka* called *lokasamudaya* =  *anulomapaticcasamuppâda dhamma* and of the dissolution of *sankhâraloka* called the *lokanirodha*  =  *anulomapaticcasamuppâda  dhamma*  are  understood  and  visualized  by means of *paccakkha ñâna*, after eradicating the the five causes such as *saddhâ*, *ruci*,  *anussava*, *âkâparivitakka* and *ditthinicchânakkhanti*. 

The reply was that the process of the arising and dissolution of the *sankhâraloka* has been understood and visualized by the *paccakkha ñâna* only, but not with these five causes.   In accordance with the *desanâ* – *purimakammabhavassamim moho avijjâ* – admonished in the 12 characters of *paticca samuppâda*, page (50) of Patisambhidâmagga pâli in which the  Venerable Musila  has admittedly stated to have understood and  visualized by means of  ***paccakkha ñâna***, the three periods are included as 

1. *Dhamma* groups of the past period referred to as *avijjâ*, *sankhâra*, 
1. The present period extending from *viññâ* to (*kamma*) *bhava*, 
1. *Dhamma* groups of the future period referred to as *jâti*, *jarâmarana*. 

Because of the inclusion of these three periods, you may called these characters of the *paticca samuppâda* also as the *dhammas* of past, future and present periods; or in accordance with the *desanâ* mentioned in Patisambhidâmagga pâli, on page (52) as – *jâta avijjâ paccuppanna* – all can be regarded as solely *paccuppanna dhamma*. Whichever  way it is regarded – 

1. In *vipassanâ* prior to *ariyamagga* called *pubbabhâgasatipatthânamagga*, 
1. At the moment of *ariyamagga*, 

A meditator must try to visualize these 12 characters of *paticca samuppâda* by the knowledge of *paccakkha ñâna* variously admonished  as *anubodhañâna*, *pativedhañâna*, *ñâtapariññâ*, *tîranapariññâ*, *pahânapariññâ*, *vipassanâsammâditthi*, *maggasammâditthi*, *aparapaccayañâna*, *attapaccakkhañâna*, etc.  As a man would see different *rûpa* objects via  his  physical  eyes,  so  should  a  meditator  make  attempt  at  understanding  and visualizing these 12 characters penetratively.  The Buddha has admonished that only understanding  and  visualizing  this  way  can  one  acquire  *ariyamagga*  where  all  *asâva dhammas*  have  been  utterly  eradicated  (Sam.-1:  267).   Only  after  penetratively understanding this way, should one discern on the past and future, which are *adittha*, in the same way. 

**Be Considerate and Ponder** 

*Yam kiñci râhula rûpam atîtânâgatapaccuppanam ijjhattam vâ bahiddhâ vâ olârikam vâ sukhumam vâ hînam vâ panîtam vâ yam dûre vâ santike vâ*, *sabbam rûpam* “*netam mama*, *nesohamassami*, *na meso attâ*”*ti evummetam yathâbhûtam sammappaññâya  passati* (*Sam*.-1: 444; *Anusayasutta*). 

***Sammappaññâya passatî**ti saha vipassanâya maggapaññâya sutthu passati* (*Sam*.-*Ttha*.- 2: 197). 

In this Suttana the Buddha has instructed Rahulâ to discern the five-fold *upâdâ*- *nakkhandhâ*, existing as 11 species situated within the past, future and present periods, and in the two *santâna* of *ijjhatta* and *bahiddha* – “*netam mama*, *nesohamassami*, *na meso  attâ*”  =  as  *anicca*,  *dukkha*  and  *anatta*  unerringly  by  virtue  of  ***sammappaññâ***.  Discern with ***sammappaññâ***, as explained in the *atthakathâ*, means to discern by  *vipassanâ paññâ*  together with *ariyamagga paññâ* so as to visualize thoroughly. 

With reference to this explanation note that the ***sammappaññâ* = good and true knowledge** means the *vipassanâ paññâ* and *ariyamagga paññâ*.  Discern with *vipassanâ paññâ*,  and also with the *ariyamagga paññâ* on the five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* of the past, future and present periods as *anicca*, *dukkha* and *anatta*.  In this discerning are the *vipassanâ paññâ* and *ariyamagga paññâ* the *anvaya ñâna* or *paccakkha ñâna*?  The  *sayâdaw* has explained in the book of meaning as follows. 

***Samma***.  **R**.  ***Passatî**ti* *pubbabhâge vipassanâñânena sammasanavasena*, *mag-gakkhane  abhisamayavasena sutthu attapaccakkhkena passat* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 181). 

In *vipassanâ* prior to *ariyamagga* the past and future five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ*s are  well discerned by ***attapaccakkha ñâna***, called the *sammâditthi ñâna*, which arose by the power of knowledge acquired through the discernment of these five-fold *khandhâs* as the  object.   During  the  *ariyamagga*  stage,  the  past  and  future  five-fold  *upâdânak- khandhâ*s are well discerned by ***attapaccakkha ñâna*,** called the *sammâditthi ñâna*, which arose  by  the  power  of  knowledge  acquired  through  concentrating  on  these  five-fold *khandhâ*s via *asamohapativedha* that annihilates the *moha* hindering the understanding of  these *khandhâ*s. 

The *vipassanâditthi ñâna*, which can discern on the past and future five-fold *upâ-* 

*dânakkhadhâ*s taking them as the object of concentration, is called ***attapaccakkha ñâna***.  In the same way *maggasammâditthi ñâna* has also been given as ***attapaccakkha ñâna*.** This explanation was given the Reverend Dhammapâva known by the name of Ãcariya  Dhammapâla. 

*Atha kho rûpâni viya cakkhuviññânena rûpâdîni tesam ca samudayâdike paccakkha  katvâ dassanam …* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 63). 

***Avijjâsamudayâ**ti avijjâya uppâdâ*, *atthibhâvâti attho*.  *Nirodhavirodhî hi atthibhâvo hoti*, *tassamâ nirodhe asati atthibhâvo hoti*, *tassamâ purimabhavasiddhâya avijjâya sati imassamim bhave rûpassa samudayo rûpassa uppâdo hotîti attho*.  ***Tahnâsamudayo  kammasamudayo**ti itthâpi eseva nayo* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 58). 

***Avijjânirodhâ rûpanirodho**ti aggamaggañânena avijjâya anuppâdanirodhato anâgatassa rûpassa anuppâdanirodho hoti paccayâbhâve abhâvato* (*Sam*.-*Tî*.-2: 59; *Mahâtî*.-2: 421). 

It was also the Reverend Dhammapâva known by the name of Ãcariya  Dhammapâla who has explained that as a man could see the *rûpa* objects by *cakkhuviñ- ñâna*, so should the following be seen penetratively by a meditator see the nature of the *samudaya* and *nirodha* = (*attanñgama*) —  

1. The five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* existing in 11 features as the past, future,  present, *ijjhatta*, *bahiddha*, *olârika*, *sukhuma*, *hîna*, *panîta*, *dûra*, *santika*, 
2. (a)  The nature of the *samudaya* of the present five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* of five- fold *patisandhekhandhâ* etc. due to arising of the causes such as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*,  *sankhâra*,  *kamma*  etc.  of  the  past  *bhava*,  which  had  been  cultivated during the establishment of the *kammabhava*; (b) the nature of the *samudaya* of the future  five-fold  *upâdânakkhandhâ*  of  five-fold  *patisandhekhandhâ*  etc.  due  to arising of the causes such as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sankhâra*, *kamma* etc. of the present  *bhava*,  which  had  been  cultivated  during  the  establishment  of  the *kammabhava*, (c) the nature of the *samudaya*, referred to as *nibbattilakkhanâ*,  of initial arising of these *upâdânakkhandhâ*s 
2. (a)  Cessation, without reappearance once again, due to *arahatta magga* of causes such  as  *avijjâ*,  *tahnâ*,  *upâdâna*,  *kamma*  etc.  called  the  nature  of  *anupâdanirodha* because  of  which  when  *upâdânakkhandhâ*s,  the  future  results,  pass  away  by  non- reappearble  cessation,  referred  to  as  cessation  by nature  of  *anupâdanirodha*  =  the nature of *nirodha* = *atthañgama*, (c) the perishing of these *upâdânakkhandha*s called  *bhañga* = the nature of *nirodha* and *atthañgama*. 

*Naydassanavasena vâ evum vuttam*.  *Patthamahñi paccuppannadhammânam  udayabbayam disvâ atha atîtânâgate nayam neti* (*Mahâ*.-*Tî*,-2: 423). 

In other words, it is explained as the  *nayadassana*  =  by virtue of demonstrating  the method.  To begin with, of the *paccuppanna dhamma*,  

`    `1 (a) The nature of the *samudaya* of the present five-fold *upâdânakkhandhâ* of five- fold *patisandhekhandhâ* etc. due to arising of the causes such as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sankhâra*,  *kamma*  etc.  of  the  past  *bhava*,  which  had  been  cultivated  during  the establishment of the *kammabhava*; (b) the nature of the *udaya* of the future five-fold  *upâdânakkhandhâ* of five-fold *patisandhekhandhâ* etc. due to arising of the causes such as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sankhâra*, *kamma* etc. of the present *bhava*, which had been cultivated during the establishment of the *kammabhava*, (c) because of cessation of the causes such as *avijjâ*, *tahnâ*, *upâdâna*, *sankhâra*, *kamma* by means of *anuppâdha* due to the *ariyamagga*, the future results like *upâdânakkhandhâs* they pass away by the nature of *anuppâdanirodha*.  This nature of this passing away, called the nature of vaya, can be visualized by ***paccayato udayabbayadassana***; 

\2.  The ***khanato udayabbayadassana*** which can discern the momentary arising and  

perishing away of (the causes) the resultant *upâdânakkhandhâ*s; 

` `It has been instructed by the very Mahâtîkâ Sayâdaw the Venerable Dhammapâla that only after discerning on these two kinds of *udayabbaya* by the *paccakkha ñâna*   concentrate on those of the past and future, which are *adittha*, in a similar way. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  teacher  of  the  book  of  meaning  never  has indicated  to  discern  on  the  past  and  future  factors  not  via  *paccakkhna  ñâna*  but  by speculation.  And those in search of eternal peace, the *nibbâna*, should always keep that in mind. 

**The Noblest Speech** 

*Yam Buddho bhâsate vâcam*, *khemam nibbânapattiyâ*. *Dukkhassantakariyâya*, *sâ ve vâcânamuttamâ* (*Sam*.-1: 191). 

*Buddho* = the Buddha who has understood the Four Noble Truth penetratively, without help of teachers, but by his own knowledge called *sayambhû ñâna*, and so named because he has made the celestial beings, the worldling, the byahmâ and all the sentient beings  to  penetratively  understand  the  Four  Noble  Truth  via  the  *paccaknakha  ñâna*.  *Nibbânapattiyâ* = to take the great *asankhata* element, the element of peacefulness, the *nibbâna dhamma*, which would bring an end to the  suffering of the worldly affairs, as the object and concentrate by means of *paccakkha ñâna*.  *Dukkhassa* = *vattadukkha* in the three lives and three planes belonging to three stages of being (e.g. *kâma*, *rûpa*, *arûpa* existences).   *Antakiriyâya* = for attaining the ending by cessation of *dukkha* via passing away of the corporeality.  *Khemam* = that which is the attainment of peace and end of the multitude of sufferings.  *Yam vâcam* = that *dhamma* talk, which should be taken as good *niyânika dhamma*, that helps one escape from *samsarâvatta*.  *Bhâsate* = has admonished with *karunâ* and *mettâ*.  *Sâ vâcâ* = that *dhamma* talk which is the  *niyânika dhamma* that lead one to escape from the  *samsarâvatta* is.  *Vâcânam* = of all the talks.  *Uttamâ*  =  the  most superior and noblest of all (*Sam*.-1: 191; *Sam*.-*Ttha*.-2: 252). 

These descriptions will suffice to conclude the treatment on ***Paccakkha ñâna*** **and** ***Anvaya ñâna***.  If the explanations given here is acccepted without reservation, then you the noble man is expected to also accept the explanations on Baddekarattasuttana. 

***Bhaddekaratta* (An Auspicious Night) *Suttana* – Explanation** 

In ***Uparipan***..***n*** ***âsapâli vibhañga***, included in *Mijjhimanikâya* of the five sections of *nikâya*, four *suttana*s come under the name of ***bhaddekaratta*** = **an auspicious night**.  The first *bhaddekaratta suttana* is *sammâsambuddhabhâsita suttana* admonished by the  Buddha, the *sabbaññu sammâsammâbuddha* himself. 

The second *suttana* is one admonished by the Venerable Ãnandâ himself. The third *suttana* was admonished by the Venerable Mahâpaccé. 

The fourth  was *sammâsammâbuddhabhâsita suttana* which came into being in  relation to the Venerable Lomasakañgiya. 

The meaning of *bhaddekaratta***  has been** given as ***baddekaratta*** = **an auspicious night**, the explanation being given with reference of method of the five-fold *khandha*s in the first, second and fourth *suttana*s.  In the third *suttana* it was given with reference to  the method of 12 species *âyatana*. 

In these *suttana*s the monks, who are exercising the *vipassanâbhâvanâkammat*- *thâna* day and night on the five-fold *khandhâ* and causes within the two *santâna*s referred to as *ijjhatta* and *bahiddha*, the three periods the past, future and present or the 12 species of *âyatana*, are expatiated to be **monks of an auspicious night**, and the **night to be of an auspicious night**.   The meditation was made to attain  *khanapaccuppanna*  by means of  

*aniccânupassanâ* etc. of the seven species of *nupassanâ*. 

If you, as  a meditator, also wanted to be **a meditating individual of an auspi- cious** **night,** you must** exercise** the *vipassanâbhâvanâkammatthâna* on the causes of the three periods and within two *santâna*s together with the five-fold *khandhâ* by means of the  *aniccânupassanâ*  etc.  of  the  seven  species  of  *nupassanâ*.   In  this  doctrine,  explanations  will  be  made  as  to  how  to  become  a  monk  of  **an  auspicious  night**, orientating towards understanding the five-fold *khandhâ* = 12 species of *âyatana* = *rûpa*- *nâma dhamma* penetratively understood by three *pariññâ*.   To acquire this penetrative knowledge, a step by step elucidation will be made of the exercise on *vipassanâ bhâvanâ***  from ***ânâpâna* way** to the attainment of *arahattaphala*. 

Among the *Baddekaratta suttanas*, four *gâthâ*s are given in brief, and their  meanings are g1iv. e  n*   *A*in*t* *î*c*t*.*a* o*m*n..t*   i*n*n*â*.u *n*a*v*ti*â*o*g*n*a*..  *m* T*e*.h *y*e*a* ,f o*n*. u*a*r*p* *pgaâttihkâa*s*ñ* a*k*r*h*e*e**  a*a*s*n* f*â*o*g*l.l*a*o *t*.w*a* .*m* ..  . 

`       `*Yadatîtam pahînam tam*, *appattañca anâgatam*. 

2. *APsaacmcuhpîpraamn*. *n aasñacma*.   *ykou pdphaamm*. ,*m* *taamm*..*   ,*v tiadtvtâh am taanttuhbay ûvihpaayses*.*a* *ti*. 
2. *ANvai jhjei vnao  ksiacñcgaamrâatma*.*p*  *tpeanma*., ,  *mkoa hjaâñseñnâe mnaa rmaancacm*.*u*  *nsâu.v e*. 
- .  .  . 
4. *Evum vihâram âtâpam*, *ahorattamatanditam*. 

*Tam ve* “*baddekaratto*”*ti*, *santo âcakkhate muni*. 

The meaning of the above *gâthâ*s are as follows. 

`    `1 (a).  As the past five-fold *khandhâ* have perished utterly, the past five-fold *khandhâ*s    

(= the 12 *âyatana*) should not be clung to by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* as “I, mine”. 

(b) As the future five-fold *khandhâ*s have not yet attained, and so have not arisen, the        future five-fold *khandhâ*s should not be anticipated by *tahnâ*-*ditthi* as “I, mine”. 

2. The man of wisdom should discern on the present five-fold *khandhâ*s 
1) at that moment of arising 
1) at that *dhamma* groups 
1) at site of forest etc., by means of *aniccânupassanâ* etc. of the seven kinds of *nupassanâ*.   The  man  of  wisdom  should  be  recollecting  on  the  indestructible *vipassanâ ñâna* to which no *tahnâ*-*ditthi* attached as “I, mine”.  In other words to enter a *janic* state of *asankhata dhâtu*, element of peacefulness, the *nibbâna* and   *phalasammâpatta* by the recollecting on these which have not been destroyed and   

`       `with no attached *tahnâ*-*ditthi* as  “I, mine”. 

3. For the purpose exercise by the recollecting *vipassanâ ñâna* or for exercise by recollection on the *phalasamâpatta*, which is associated with *samattha vipassanâ* that is able to annihilate *kilesâ*s, effort must be made without procrastination.  For  no body knows if one would be still alive tomorrow or a day after.  Indeed we never have any  

agreement with the king of death regarding when to die. 

4. The monk, who leads his life making every effort to acquire  *phalasamâpatta*, that is associated with *samattha vipassanâ* that is can annihilate   the *kilesâ*s, is, in fact, **one who belongs to an auspicious night**.  This was expatiated by the *Sabbaññu Sammâsambuddha Buddha* named *Buddhamuni* the Supreme of the *muni*s in  

`      `whom the *kilesâ*s have utterly been eradicated (*Ma*.-3: 226). 

**Delight in the Past**  

.

In accordance with instruction given in the above *gâthâ* (1) *atîtam nânvâgameya* 

- the past is not to be followed.  Regarding this instruction as to whether or not the past is  fo*t*l*a*lo*tt*w*Kh*e*aa*d*nt*,*ha* t*an*h*ñd*e*ci* *ma*B.**   u*bs*d*ha*d*imk*h*ka*a*hn* h*av*i*vâ*m*en* s*ea*e*tti*l*î*.f*t*  *a* h“*mE*as *va* *u*e*n*x*mv*p*â v*l*g*a*ea*i*d*n*ma*e*en*d*no* a*i*., s   “Rf*e*o.*v* l *u*l*E*o*m*.w*v* *u r*s*m*.*û*.  *p soa ñañhoo*.*s* *i* *mE*.*v*  *autmît asmanakdhdâhrâon*.*a*  ”*Etvi um*.*  

. 

- . 
- .  . 

*viññâno ahosim atîtamaddhân*.*a* ”*ti attha nandim samanvâneti*.  *Evum kho bhikkhave  atîtam anvâgamaneti* (*Ma*.-3: 226). 

- . 

***Attha nandim samanvâdhnatî**ti tesu rûpâdîsu tahnam samanvâneti anupavatteti* (*Ma*.- *T*..*t* *ha*.-4: 171). 

Bhikkhus …. How is the past enjoyed? 

1. Delight in the past *rûpa dhamma*, the *nandî dhamma*, as **–** “The *rûpa* *dhamma* has arisen in the past” **–** has appeared. 
1. “Such a feeling = *vedanâ dhamma* in the past, 
1. Such an awareness = *saññâ dhamma*, 
1. Such a dynamic groups of *cetasika sankhâra dhammas*, 
1. Such a mental quality = *viññâna dhamma* has arisen.” will cause the formation of delight in the past (*vedanâ*-*saññâ*-*sankhâra*) *viññâna dhammas*.  Bhikkhus …. The  

`      `past is enjoyed in this way (*Ma*. 3: 226). 

If the delight, *nandî dhammas*,* in the *rûpa*-*vedanâ*-*saññâ*-*sankhâra*-*viññâna* of the past resulted as expounded above by the Buddha, then there always is enjoyment in the  past.   This  is  what  it  really  means  and  which  must  be  well  noted.   Again  the Venenrable Mahâkaccé also has explained how to have enjoyment in the past as given below.  . 

*Kathañca âvuso atîtam*.  *anvâga*.*m*  *eti?  Iti me ca*. *kkhu ahosi atîtamaddhânam*, *iti rûpâti*, *tattha sandarâgappatibaddham hoti viññânam*, *sandarâgappatibaddhattâ viññânassa*  

**.** 

*tadabhisandati*, *tadabhinadanto atîtam anvâgameti* (*Ma*.-3: 236). 

My colleagues ….  In what ways is the past always enjoyed? 

The *nikanti viññâna* associated with longing for element of eye clearness and in material object, the *chandharâga*, had arisen such as in the past I have had element of eye clearness in this way, my material objects have been this way.  Because of association of this conscious (*nikanti*) *viññâna dhamma* with the clinging, *râgasandha*, one is delighted in the element of eye clearness and material object.  If one is delighted with the element of eye clearness and material object, then he is delighted in the past.  (It has been expatia- ted that the same applies to the remaining *âyatana*s). 
