PAGE135

In the above sermon too the instruction is that it must be kept firmly in mind that if delight has been attached to 12 species of _āyatana_, then the past is delighted in.

How the Past is Not Enjoyed

_nandim na sa_. _manvāneti_. “_Evum vedano_. R. ._E_ ._v_ _um_. _sañño_.. _Evum_. _san_._k_ _hāro_. _Evum_. _Kathañca Bhikkhave atītam_. _nānvāgameti_, “_evum rūpo ahosim atītamaddhānan_”_ti tattha_

-   .

_viññāno ahosim atītamaddh_._ā_ _nan_”_ti tattha nandim na samnvāneti_. _Evum kho bhikkhave atītam nāmanvāgameti_ (_Ma_.-3: 226 – 227).

 Bhikkhave …. In what way was the past not enjoyed?

1. Delight in the past _rūpa dhamma_, the _nandī dhamma_, as **–** “The _rūpa_ _dhamma_ has arisen in the past” **–** has not appeared.
1. “Such a feeling = _vedanā dhamma_ in the past,
1. Such an awareness = _saññā dhamma_,
1. Such a dynamic groups of _cetasika sankhāra dhammas_,
1. Such a mental quality = _viññāna dhamma_” will cause the formation of delight in the past (_vedanā_-_saññā_-_sankhāra_), _viññāna dhammas_ has not arisen. Bhikkhus ….

 This is how the past is not enjoyed (_Ma_.3: 236).

The Venerable Mahākaccé has also explained how no enjoyment is seeked in the

past.

_Kathañca āvusso atītam nānvāgameti_.. _Iti me cakkhu ahosi atītamaddhānam_, _iti rūpāti_, _tattha na sandarāgappatibaddham hoti vuññānam_. , _na s_._a_ _ndarāgappatibaddhattā_

 _viññānassa na tadabhinandati_, _na tadabhinandanto atītam nānvāgameti_ (_Ma_.-3: 236).

My colleagues …. In what ways is the past not always followed?

The _nikanti viññāna_ associated with longing for element of eye clearness and in material object, the _chandharāga_, had not arisen such as in the past I have had element of eye clearness in this way, my material objects have been this way. Because of dissociation of this conscious (_nikanti_) _viññāna dhamma_ with the clinging, _chandharāga_, one is not delighted in the element of eye clearness and material object. If one is not delighted with the element of eye clearness and material object, then he is not delighted in the past (_Ma_.-3: 236).

The same has been instructed to apply to the remaining *āyatana*s. In this sermon, if there is enjoyment in the 12 *āyatana*s, then this means that the past is still enjoyed, and it should be remembered that if there is no enjoyment in the 12 *āyatana*s there will be no delight in the past.

The explanations given by the Buddha and the Venerable Mahākaccé are that if there has been delight, the _nadīdhamma_, in the five-fold *khandhā*s, _rūpa_ and _nāma dham_- *ma*s called the 12 *āyatan*s, then the past will be clung to. If *nadīdhamma*s have not arisen then it is clear that there is no pleasure in the past. These are the *desanā*s which have

instructed with emphasizing only on the exercise to be detached from the past *khandhā*s and *āyatana*s*.* It should be realized that these *desanā*s instructed only to be detached, to be free from attachment to, the past *khandhā*s, *āyatana*s or _tahnā ditthi_. These, however, do not mean that the past _khandhā_-_āyatana_-_rūpa_-_nāma_ are not to be taken as the object of meditation.

Expectation of the Future

_Kathañca bhikkhave anāgatam_. _patikañkhati_? _“Evum_. _rūpo siyam_. _anāgatamaddhānan_”_ti_

-   . . . . .

_tattha nandi_._m_ _samanvāneti_. _Evum vedano siyam_.. R. _Evum sañño s_._i_ _yam_. “_Evum viññāno siyam anāatamaddhānan_._”_ _ti tattha nandim samnvāneti_. _Evum kho bhikkhave anāgatam patikañkhati_ (_MA_.-3: 227).

Bhikkhave …. How is the future expected?

1. Delight in the future _rūpa dhamma_, the _nandī dhamma_, as **–** “The _rūpa_ _dhamma_ is anticipated to arise in the future.”
1. This kind of feeling in future = _vedanā dhamma_. R.
1. Such an awareness = _saññā dhamma_.
1. _Cetasika sankhāra dhamma_ which are subject to such changes.
1. Such a consciousness = delight, *nandī dhamma*s, in the future *viññāna dhamma\*\* (*vedanā*-*saññā*-*sankhāra\*) results when a wish is made for them.

 Bhikkhus …. The longing for the future has been made in this way.

 This is what the Buddha has expounded with regard to longing for the future. Again the Venerable Mahākaccé has expatiated on the anticipation of the future in the following way.

-   .

_Kathañca āvusso anāgatam patikañkhati_.. _Iti me cakkhu siyā anāgatamaddhānam_, _iti rūpāti appatiladdhassa patilābhāya cittam panidahati_, _c_. _etaso panidhānapaccayā tada- nadati_, _tadabhinandati_, _tadabhinandanto anāgatam patikañkhati_ (_Ma_.-3:237).

My colleagues …. In what way is the past longed for? May the element of my eye clearness be so in future; may my corporeality be so. The mind has been set in this way on the eye clearness element and corporeality which have yet to acquire. The mind set in this way is the cause due which the awareness in the eye clearness element and corporeality have resulted. If there is delight in this eye clearness element and corporeality, then will be anticipation for the future. (It has been admonished that the same applies to the remaining *āyatana*s) (_Ma_.-3:237).

According to the _desanā_ admonished here —

If a wish has been made in mind that in the future period and future life as to be a human of good deeds, a god of good deeds, and had made wishes after performance of _kusala_ actions, then this means there is delight in the five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_ of the human and of the god. Note that if there is enjoyment for these, then there is anticipation for the future.

**Not Anticipating the Future**

_Kathañca bhikkhave anāgatam nappatikañkhati_. “_Evum rūpo siyam anāgatamaddhā- nan_”_ti tattha nandim na samanvāneti_. _Evum vedano siyam_. R. _Evum sañño siyam_. _Evum sankhāro siyam_. “_Evum viññāno siyam anāgatamaddhānan_”_ti tattha nandim na samanvāneti_. _Evum kho bhikkhave anāgatam nappatikañkhati_(_Ma_.-3:227).

Bikkhave …. In what way is the future not anticipated?

Enjoyment, _nandī dhamma_, in the future corporeality as “I wish to have a human good looking material body in future” does not happen to arise in one again and again.

Such an enjoyable feeling = wish to be one with _vedanā_. R.

Such an awareness = wish to be one with _saññā_.

Wish to be one with such a _cetasika_ and _sankhāra dhamma_ groups subject to change.

“Wish to be one with such an enjoyable consciousness = _viññāna_ in future”, a delight in these future\* _viññāna dhamma_ (_vedanā_-_saññā_-_sankhāra_) groups have not been made again and again.

Bhikkhus …. This how the future has not been anticipated (_Ma_.-3: 227).

This is the _desanā_ expatiated by the Buddha, through his _mukhapāttha_, as an explanation of how the future is not anticipated. With regard to non-anticipation of the future, the Venerable Mahākaccé has given the following explanation.

_Kathañca āvusso anāgatam nappatikañkhati_. _Iti me cakkhu siyā anāgatamaddhānam_, _iti rūpāti appatiladdhassa patilābhāya cittam nappanidahati_. _Cetaso appanidhānapaccayā na tadabhinadati_, _na tadabhinandanto anāgatam nappatikañkhati_ (_Ma_.-3: 237).

My colleagues …. In what way is the future not anticipated? The mind is not set on the eye clearness element not yet acquired as I wish my future eye clearness element be this way, material objects be like this. Because of the non-committed mind as the cause, there is no enjoyment in the future eye clearness element and material object. If there is no delight in the future eye clearness element and material object, then the future will not be longed for or anticipated. (A similar explanation was expatiated for the remaining five pairs of *āyatana*s). (_Ma_.-3: 237).

Note again that with reference to the above _desanā_ expounded by the Omniscient Buddha and the explanations given by the Venerable Mahākaccé, no longing for nor delight in the future five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_ and the _rūpa_-_nāma_, called the twelve *āyatana*s, as “Let me be it,” means no anticipation on the future.

With regard to the above explanations and instructions, teacher of the book of meaning also has the given meaning of “**do not long for future**, **do not anticipate the future**” as follows.

**\*Atīta**nti atīte pañcakkhandhe\*. **\*Nānvāgameyā**ti tahnāditthīhi nānugaccheya\*.

**\*Napatikañkhe**ti tahnāditthihi na pattheya* (*Ma*.-*Ttha\*.4: 170).

 The past refers to the five-fold _khandhā_ of the past (= 12 species of _āyatana_); do not long for the past means not to long for the past five-fold _khandhā_ (= the _āyatana_ 12 species) by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ as “I **–** **Mine = Let me be like this. Let me be like this**”**.**

Do not anticipate for the future means not to long for the future five-fold _khandhā_ (= _āyatana_ 12 species) by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ as “**I would like to be this. I would like to be this.**”

**The Essence of the Sermon**

The actual sense of this pāli book of meaning is this.

1. If attachment is made on the past five-fold _khandhā_ by _tahnā_-_ditthi_, then it is longing for the past.
1. If attachment is not made on past five-fold _khandhā_ by _tahnā_-_ditthi_, then means that the past is not longed for.
1. If attachment is made on the future five-fold _khandhā_ by _tahnā_-_ditthi_, then it is longing for the future.
1. If attachment is not made on future five-fold _khandhā_ by _tahnā_-_ditthi_, then means that the future is not longed for.

This is the basic idea of the statement.

1. Do not to long for the past means to meditate so as not be attached on the past five- fold _khandhā_ by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ and effort must be made not be so attached.
1. Do not to long for the future means to meditate so as not be attached on the future five-fold _khandhā_ by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ and effort must be made not be so attached.

 It should be accepted without reservation that this is what the _desanā_ really means.

**Attraction to _Tahnā_-_Ditthi_ in the Present**

The Buddha Sabbñusammāsambuddha himself has expatiated as if there is _sakkāya ditthi_ referred to as _attaditthi_ = my life, my soul, my _viññāna_ and my self, attached either on the present five-fold _khandhā_ or on any one of these five, and if there is attachment as I, other, male, female, individuality, sentient being, human, god, _byahmā_, then attraction will be exerted on the five-fold _khandhā_ by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ (_Ma_,-3: 227).

Bhikkhus …. In what way is attraction made on the present by _tahnā_-_ditthi_?

Bhikkhus …. In this world, worldlings, who are not used to seeing the *ariya*s, being incompetent in and unfamiliar with the _ariyādhamma_, and not used to seeing the people of good deeds being incompetent in, unfamiliar with, and unheard of the good _dhamma_, are being attracted by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ in the following way.

1. _Rūpa_ is discerned as _atta_.
1. (The remaining *khandhā*s) Are discerned as possessing _atta_,
1. Discerning as _rūpa_ in _atta_ and
1. _Atta_ in _rūpa_.

Feeling as _vedanā_ is. R.

 Awareness as saññā is. R.

 _Cetasika sankhāra dhamma_ groups subject to change as. R.

1. Awareness = discern _viññāna_ as _atta_.
1. (The remaining *khandhā*s) Are discerned as possessing _atta_.
1. Discerning as _rūpa_ in _atta_ and
1. _Atta_ in _rūpa_.

 Bhikkhus …. In this way attraction is made to the present *dhamma*s by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ (_Ma_.-3: 227).

The Venerable Mahākaccé too has expounded as follow.

_Kathañca āvusso paccuppannesu dhammesu samhīrati_.

_Yañcāvusso cakkhu_, _ye ca rūpā_. _Ubhayametam paccuppannam_, _tassamim ce paccuppanne chandarāgappatibaddham hoti viññānam_, _chandarāgappatibadhattā viññānassa tadabhinandanto paccuppannesu dhammesu samhīrati_ (_Ma_.-3: 237).

My colleagues …. In what way do _thanā_-_ditthi_ attract as “I, mine” in the present *dhamma*s?

My colleagues …. Eye clearness element (= _cakkhupasāda_) and _rūpa_ object are a pair of the present. Longing for the eye clearness element and _rūpa_ object of the present = awareness connected with _chanda_-_rāga_ = _viññāna_ may occur. Then that eye clearness element and _rūpa_ object will be enjoyed because of the awareness = longing of the _viññāna_ = the state of being connected with the _chandarāga_. If there is delight in the eye clearness element and _rūpa_ object, then there is attraction by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ to these present *dhamma*s. (The same phenomenon for the remaining five pairs of *āyatana*s have been expounded).

**Distraction by _Tahnā_-_Ditthi_ in the Present**

Bhikkhave …. In what way do _tahnā_-_ditthi_ distract in the present?

Bhikkhus …. In this world, _sāvaka_, the followers of the Buddha’s _desanā_, who are used to seeing the *ariya*s, being competent in and familiar with the _ariyādhamma_, and used to seeing the people of good deeds, being competent in, familiar with and having knowledge of the good _dhamma_, are being distracted by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ in the following way.

5. _Rūpa_ is discerned not as _atta_.
6. (The remaining *khandhā*s) Are discerned as not possessing _atta_,
7. Not discerning as _rūpa_ in _atta_ nor
8. _Atta_ in _rūpa_.

Feeling as _vedanā_ is. R.

 Awareness as saññā is. R.

 _Cetasika sankhāra dhamma_ groups subject to change as. R.

5. Awareness = discern _viññāna_ not as _atta_.
6. (The remaining *khandhā*s) Are discerned as not possessing _atta_.
7. Not discerning as _rūpa_ in _atta_ nor
8. _Atta_ in _rūpa_.

 Bhikkhus …. In this way no attraction is made to the present *dhamma*s by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ (_Ma_.-3: 227).

_Kathañca āvusso paccuppannosu_ _dhammesu na samhīrati_.

_Yañcāvusso cakkhu_, _ubhayametam paccuppannam_, _tassamim ce paccuppanne na chadarāgappatibaddham hoti viññānam_. _Na chandarāgappatibaddhattā viññānassa na tadabhinandati_, _na tadabhinandanto paccuppannesu dhammesu na samhīrati_ (_Ma_.-3:238).

My colleagues …. In what way is no attraction made to the present *dhamma*s by _tahnā_-_ditthi_?

My colleagues …. The eye clearness element and the _rūpa_ object are a pair of the present. Suppose the longing for present eye clearness element and _rūpa_ object = awareness associated with _chanda_-_rāga_ = _viññāna_ does not arise. Because of the awareness = longing of the _viññāna_ = being dissociated with _chanda_-_rāga_ result in

distraction of that eye clearness element and _rūpa_ object. If there is no delight in these two, then there is no attraction to the present *dhamma*s by means of _tahnā_-_ditthi_. (It has been expatiated that the same applies to remaining five pairs of *āyatana*s).

**The Meaning of the _Desanā_**

The meaning of the _desanā_ has been given by the teacher of the book of meaning

as follows.

_Tattha **samhīratī**ti vipassanāya abhāvato tahnāditthīhi ākatthiyati_. **\*Na samhīratī**ti vipassanāya bhāvena tahnāditthīti ākatthiyati* (*Ma*.-*Ttha\*.-4: 171 - 172).

Because _vipassanā ñāna_ does not arise in the present *dhamma*s = due to the _vipassanā ñāna_ being not apparent, there is an attraction exerted by _tahnā_-_ditthi_. Due to arising of the _vipassanā ñāna_ in the present *dhamma*s, there apparently is _vipassanā ñāna_ because of which no attraction can be exerted on the present *dhamma*s.\*

(_Ma_.-_Ttha_.- 4: 171 - 172).

In accordance with the explanations given in the above, if _vipassanā ñāna_ are arising on the present *dhamma*s, there can be no attraction by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ = there can be no _tahnā_-_ditthi_. If no _vipassanā ñāna_ arises on the present *dhamma*s, attraction by _tahnā_- _ditthi_ will be exerted = the _tahnā_-_ditthi_ will be arising. Therefore, the Buddha himself has instructed in second _gāthā_ to be free from attraction by _tahnā_-_ditthi_. So as not to be attached by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ on the present five-fold _khandhā_ and _rūpanāma_ *dhamma*s must be dissolved and discerned by _vipassanā_ via _aniccānupassanā ñāna_, _dukkhānupassanā ñāna_, _anattānupassanā ñāna_, _nibbidānupassanā ñāna_, _virāganupassanā ñāna_, _nirodhā- nupassanā ñāna_, _patinissaggā ñāna_, referred to as the seven _anupassanā ñāna_, again and again.

_Paccuppannañca yo dhammam_, _tattha tattha vipassati_.

_Asamhīram asamkuppam_, _tam viddvā manubayūhaye_.

(The meaning of this stanza is given at the beginning of Baddekaratta suttana).

The explanations have also been given by _atthakathā_-_tīkā_ as follows.

**\*Attha tatthā**ti paccuppannampi dhammam yattha yattheva ca nam aniccānupassanādīhi sattahi anupassanāhi yo vipassani*, *araññādīsu vā tattha tattheva vipassati* (*Ma*.-*Ttha\*.- 4: 170).

**\*Yattha yatthā**ti yassamim yassamim khane*, *yassamim yassamim vā dhammapuñje uppannam*, *tam sabbampi asesetvā* (*a*.-*Tī\*.-3: 366).

The following is what these _atthakathā_-_tīkā_ mean.

Concentration is repetitively made on the present five-fold *khandhā*s as

1. At the moment of arising,
1. In places like forest etc.,
1. Those groups of dhamma, as they are, are entirely discerned by _aniccānupassanā_ etc. of the seven _anupassanā ñāna_. The _vipassanā ñāna_,

concentrating on the object, is never attracted by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ of the *kilesā*s. This _vipassanā ñāna_ is indestructible by _tahnā_-_ditthi_ of the *kilesā*s. Then the _vipassanā ñāna_ is again discerned = culture that _vipassanā ñāna_. Discernment in this way is also discerning on the five-fold _khandhā_ = _manodvārika mahākusala jovīthi citta_ led by _vipassanā ñāna_ in turn is concentrated so that the object of concentration and concentra- ting _ñāna_ as a pair is being discerned.

If _vipassanā ñāna_ is increased by discerning this way the opposing _kilesā_ of _raga_ etc. cannot destroy it. A man of wisdom must discern repeatedly on the _vipassanā ñāna_ which is indestructible by the opposing _kilesā_ of _tahnā_-_ditthi_ etc.

This description of indestructibility of _vipassanā ñāna_ is just a _pariyāya_. As the _vipassanā ñāna_ can only momentarily eradicate the opposing *kilesa*s, it can remain indes- tructible only momentarily.

In fact it is the _nibbāna dhamma_, named the _asankhata dhātu_, which certainly remains indestructible by means of the opposing *kilesa*s. Therefore, a man of wisdom must exercise on the _vipassanā bhāvanā_ via _vipassanā ñāna_ to ultimately attain path knowledge and fruit knowledge. Then with the path knowledge so acquired, enter the fruit absorption (_phalsammāpatti_) state repeatedly taking the _asankhata dhātu_, the element of peacefulness, the _nibbāna_ as the object. This is the meaning the second _gātha_.

**Instructions Acquired**

If the above two *gāthā*s are taken in brief, the Buddha has instructed that –

1. Not to have _tahnā_-_ditthi_ on the past five-fold _khandhā_,
1. Not to have _tahnā_-_ditthi_ on the future five-fold _khandhā_,
1. Not to have _tahnā_-_ditthi_ on the present five-fold _khandhā_.

It has also been instructed that the present five-fold _khandhā_ are repetitively concentrated, not to have _tahnā_-_ditthi_ on them, by means of _aniccānupassanā_ etc. of the seven _anupassanā ñāna_.

If so a question arises as to how to practise in such a way that one has no _tahnā_- _ditthi_ on the five-fold *khandhā*s of the past, future and present. The answer for this is as given below.

**Extracts from Patisambhidāmagga Pāli**

_Katham atītānāgatapaccuppannānam dhammānam sañkhipitvā vavatthāne paññā sammane ñānam –_

_Yam kañci rūpam atītānāgatapaccuppannam acchattam vā bhahiddhā vā olārika vā sukhumam vā yam dūre vā santike vā_, _sabbam rūpam aniccato vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam_. _Dukkhato vavatthapeti ekam sammanam_, _anattato vavatthapeti ekam_

 _sammanam._

_Yā kāci vedanā_. R. _Yā kāci saññā_. _Ye keci sankhārā_. _Yam kañci viññānam atītānāgata- paccuppannam ijjhattam vā bhahiddhā vā olārikam vā sukhumam vā hīnam vā panītam_

_vā yam dūre santike vā_. _Sabbam viññānam aniccato vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam_. _Dukkho vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam_, _attato vavatthapeti ekam sammasanam_ (_Patisam_.: 51).

Why is the knowledge that can analyze in brief the past, future and present *dhamma*s called the _sammasana ñāna_? The past, the future, the present, _ijjhatta_, _bahiddha_, _olārika_, _sukhuma_, _hīna_, _panīta_, _dūra_, _santika_ which are all *rūpa*s, and individually noted as _anicca_ is an analytical notion = called _sammasana_. Individually noted as _dukkha_ is another analytical notion = called _sammasana_. Individually noted as _anatta_ is still

another analytical notion = called _sammasana_ (_Patisam_.: 51).

_Tasamā esa yam **atītam** rūpam_, _tam yasamā atīteyeva khīnam_, _nayimam bhavum sampat- tanti aniccam kayatthena_. _Yam **anāgatam** rūpam anantarabhave nibbattissati_, _na tato param bhavum gamissatīti aniccam khayatthena_. _Yam **paccuppannam** rūpam_, _tampi idheva khīyati_, _na ito gicchatīti aniccam khayatthena_ (_Vi._-2: 245; _Patisam_.-_Ttha_.-1: 229). Therefore, this meditating monk discerns in this way. –

1. A certain **\*atita rūpa** dhamma* did exist that, however, perished away in the past and never reaching the present life. Due to this nature of perishing and dissolving away, it is discerned as *anicca\*.
1. A certain **\*anāgata rūpa** dhamma* will arise in the future that will perish away in the future, but will never continue into next future. Because of this nature of perishing and dissolving away, it is discerned as *anicca\*.
1. A certain **_paccuppanna rūpa_** _dhamma_ does exist that, however, perishes away in the present, but will never continue into another life. Due to this nature of perishing

 and dissolving away, it is discerned as _anicca_ (_Vi._-2: 245; _Patisam_.-_Ttha_.-1: 229).

[**Note**. It has been expatiated to discern on the *vedanā*, *saññā*, *sankhāra*, *viññāna* etc. of the four-fold *nāmakhandhā*s, the 12 *āyatanas*, 18 *dhātus* and the 12 characters of *paticca samuppāda* in a way similar to that applied for the *rūpakkhandhā*. See *Patisam*.: 51-52.]

_Evum sankhāra annatto passantassa **ditthisamugghātanam** nāma hoti_. _Aniccato passantassa **mānasamugghātanam** nāma hoti_. _Dukkhato passantassa **nikantipariyādānam** nāma hoti_. _Iti ayam vipassanā anattano anattano tthāne yeva titthatīti_ (_Visuddhi_-2:264).

In this way in the _santāna_ of the one who understands the *sankhāra dhamma*s as the _anatta_, **_ditthisamugghātna_** = distraction from _ditthi_ appears. When one who understands the *sankhāra dhamma*s as the _anicca_, **_mānasamugghātana_** = distraction from _māna_ appears. When one who understands the *sankhāra dhamma*s as the _dukkha_, **_nikantipariyādāna_** = dissolution of _tahnānikanti_ appears. Note that each _vipassanā_ is related to its corresponding character (_Visuddhi_-2:264).

Here explanation of Mahātīkāsayādaw is briefly described. (For detail see Mahātīkā vol. II, pp. 415 – 416; Nibbāgāminipatipadā, vol. V, in section on Sammā- sana ñāna, pp. 152 – 153).

Although _anattānupassanā ñāna_ can distract _ditthi_, it is not this _ñāna_ alone which can do so. Only when supported by the force of the _aniccānupassanā ñāna_ and _dukkānupassanā ñāna_, based on the powerful _upanissaypaccaya_, the _anattānupassanā ñāna_ becomes sharp, clean and powerful. Then it can dissociate itself from clinging to the _ditthi_.

Similarly even though _anattānupassanā ñāna_ can distract clinging to _māna_, it is not this _ñāna_ alone which can do so. Only when supported by the force of the _aniccānupassanā ñāna_ and _dukkānupassanā ñāna_, based on the powerful _upanissaypaccaya_, the _anattānupassanā ñāna_ becomes sharp, clean and powerful. Then it can dissociate itself from the clinging to the _māna_.

_Aniccasaññā bhāvetabbā asamimānasamugghātāya_ = the Buddha has instructed that for the sake of detaching from the clinging on to the _asamimāna_, meditate on the _aniccasaññā_ (_Mahātī_.-2: 416).

Again although _dukkhānupassanā ñāna_ can dissolve the _nikanti_,* the clinging to *tahnā*, it is not this *ñāna* alone which can do so. Only when supported by the force of the *aniccānupassanā ñāna* and *anattānupassanā ñāna*, based on the powerful *upanissaypaccaya*, the *dukkhānupassanā ñāna* becomes sharp, clean and powerful. Then it can dissociate itself from the clinging on to the *tahnā\*.

Since the clinging to _tahnā_ cannot be detached by _aniccānupassanā_ alone nor to _māna_ by _dukkhānupassanā_ alone nor to _ditthi_ by _anattānupassanā_ alone, _vipassanā_ exercise must be made on each of the three general characters taken alternately as the object. In discerning this way, priority may be given to _aniccalakkhanā_ if need be. The same applies to _dukkhalakkhanā_ and _anattalakkhanā_.

Because of _vipassanā_ exercise by recollection, the _anattānupassanā ñāna_ becomes sharper, clearer, more penetrative, effective, accumulated and powerful enough to dissolve the clinging to _atta_ by support of the _aniccānupassanā ñāna_ and _dukkhānupassanā ñāna_. Then this _anattānupassanā_ is powerful enough to demolish the clinging to _attaditthi_.

At a corresponding time the _aniccānupassanā ñāna_ becomes sharper, clearer, more penetrative, effective, accumulated and powerful enough to dissolve the clinging to _atta_ by support of the _dukkhānupassanā ñāna_ and _anattānupassanā_. Then this _aniccānupassanā ñāna_ is powerful enough to demolish the clinging to _māna_.

At a corresponding time the _dukkhānupassanā ñāna_ becomes sharper, clearer, more penetrative, effective, accumulated and powerful enough to dissolve the clinging to _atta_ by support of the _aniccānupassanā ñāna_ and _anattānupassanā ñāna_. Then this _dukkhānupassanā ñāna_ is powerful enough to demolish the clinging to _tahnā_ (see

_Mahātī_.-2: 415 – 416).

**The Power of _Lokiyabhāvanā_**

_Lokiyabhavanāya hi kāye pahīnam na vedanādīsu pahīnam hoti_. _Yadipi na pavatteya_, _na **ekattha pahīnam sesesupi pahīnam hotī**ti maggasatipatthābhāvanam_, _lokiya- bhāvanāya vā sabbattha appavattimattam sandhāya vuttam_ (_Ma_.-_Tī_.-1: 347).

The power of _lokuttarāmaggasatipatthānabhāvana_ and that of _lokiyasatipatthā- nabhāvanā_ are not similar. As mediator is exercising _vipassanā_ on the _paramattha_ objects such as _kāya_, _vedanā_, _ciita, dhamma_ etc.,* along with culturing their causes, he arrives at a stage about to attain the *ariyamagga*. At that instant the meditator can concentrate on any of *kāya*, *vedanā*, *ciita, dhamma* in the process of *vipassanā* and still can acquire *ariyamagga*. If *ariyamagga* is attained while concentrating on the *rūpa\* _dhamma_, named _kāya_, then it can disintegrate and annihilate not only the _tahnā_ and _māna_ clinging to the _rūpa dhamma_, but the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clinging on to the _vedanā_, _citta_, and _dhamma_. Remember that the same thing happens in exercising _vipassanā_ on the _vedanā_, _citta_, and _dhamma_. The *lokuttara ariyamagga dhamma*s are, however, the dhammas which can arise only when supported by the force of powerful vipassanā nanas such as _upanissaya_ and _paccayasatti_ bases.

On the other hand, the _lokiyasatipatthāna bhāvanā_ is not that powerful. If _vipassanā_ exercise is made on the _rūpa dhamma_, named _kāya_, as the object, then _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clung to this _dhamma_ can be dissolved momentarily. This _kāyānupassanā satipatthāna bhāvanā_ cannot disintegrate _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clung to _vedanā_, _citta_ and _dhamma_. It must be reminded that a similar situation occurs when discerning on the _vedanā_, _citta_ and _dhamma_.

Therefore, in the case of _lokiyasatipatthānabhāvanā_, _vipassanā_ exercise is made on the _kāya_ so as to dissolve the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clung to the _kāya_. The exercise is made on the _vedanā_ so as to dissolve the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clung to the _vedanā_.* The *vipassanā* exercise is made on the *citta* so as to disintegrate the *tahnā*, *māna* and *ditthi* clung to the *citta*.* The _vipassanā_ exercise is made on the *dhamma*s so as to dissolve the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clung to the _dhamma_.

As a matter of fact, _kāya_, _vedanā, citta_ and _dhamma_ are the five-fold _upādānak_- _khandhā_. So, to annihilate the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clung to the present five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_, meditation is made on the present _upādākkhandhā_ as an object. To annihilate the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clung to the past five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_, meditation is made on the past _upādākkhandhā_ as an object. To annihilate the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ going to be clung to the future five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_, meditation is made on the future _upādākkhandhā_ as an object. This the method of practicing for eradication of the _tahnā_, _māna_ and _ditthi_ clinging to the past, future and present five- fold *upādānakkhandhā*s.

Therefore the following instructions are achieved from the above.

1. To be free from _tahā_-_ditthi_ attached to present five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_ the _vipassanā_ exercise is made on present five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_.
1. To be free from _tahā_-_ditthi_ attached to past five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_ the _vipassanā_ exercise is made on past five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_.
1. To be free from _tahā_-_ditthi_ attached to future five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_ the

 _vipassanā_ exercise is made on future five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_.

As explained in Section on the _Paccakkha ñāna_ and _Anvaya ñāna_, as to whether _paccakkha ñāna_ or _anvaya ñāna_ is employed in discerning on the past and future, the Buddha has expounded it to be _nāmarūpapariccheda ñāna_ to _attapaccakkha ñāna_. With reference to this –

_Pubbabhāge vipassanāñānena sammasanvasena_. R. _Sulu attapaccakkhena ñānena passati_ (_Sam_.-_Tī_.-2: 181)

What it means is that in the _vipassanā_ prior to _ariyamagga_ the 12 phenomena of the five-fold _upādānakkhandhā_, existing as the past, future and present etc., are discerned analytically, _samāsana_, taking them as the object, by the power of which they are well discerned, well understood and well realized. These are acquired via _attapaccakkha ñāna_, called _vipassanāsammāditthi_. (for discerning by _Anvaya ñāna_ see section on Vipassanā on pp )

If in deed _vipassanā_ exercise is made on the past and future *khandhā*s to be from the _tanhā_-_ditthi_ attached to these. If so, which descriptions in this Baddekaratta suttana instruct for _viapassanā_ meditation on the past and future? The answer is as follows.

1. _Atītam nānvāgameya_ = The past must not be followed by with _tahnā_-_ditthi_,
1. _Nappatikañkhe anāgatam_ = The future must not be anticipated with _tahnā_-_ditthi_.

Note that these are instructions to exercise _vippasanā_ on past and future *khandhā*s so as to be free from attachment on the past and future _khandhās_. Only by destruction of _kilesā_ aggregates by virtue of _vipassanā_ knowledge (the Path Knowledge) referred to as _nibbedhika_ knowledge, which is endowed this power, can these aggregates be eradicated. It must be noted that they cannot be disintegrated without discerning on the past and the future.

The _tahnā_-_ditthi_ clung on the past and future will never cease without concen- trating on the past and future. Meditation is made on the present _khandhās_ to free oneself from the _tahnā_-_ditthi_ attached on the present *khandhā*s. Similarly meditation is made on the past and future _khandhās_ to free oneself from the _tahnā_-_ditthi_ attached on the past and future *khandhā*s. Read the following *suttana*s for further information.

**_Kālattayaanicca_ (_Dukkha_ - _Annata_) Suttana**

_Rūpam bhikkhave aniccam atītānāgatam_, _ko pana vādo paccuppanassa_. _Evum passam bhikkhave sutavā ariyasāvako atītassamin rūpassamim anapakkho hoti_, _anāgatam rūpam nābhinandati_, _paccuppannassa rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya patipanno hoti._ R. _nābhinandati_, _paccuppannassa rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya patipanno hoti._ R

_Rūpam bhikkhave dukkham atītānāgatam_, _ko pana vādo paccuppanassa_. _Evum passam bhikkhave sutavā ariyasāvako atītassamin rūpassamim anapakkho hoti_, _anāgatam rūpam nābhinandati_, _paccuppannassa rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya patipanno hoti._ R

_Rūpam bhikkhave anattam atītānāgatam_, _ko pana vādo paccuppanassa_. _Evum passam bhikkhave sutavā ariyasāvako atītassamin rūpassamim anapakkho hoti_, _anāgatam rūpam nābhinandati_, _paccuppannassa rūpassa nibbidāya virāgāya nirodhāya patipanno hoti. Vedanā aniccā_. R. _Dukkhā_. R. _Anattā_. R.

_Saññā aniccā_. R. _Dukkhā_. R. _Anattā_. R.

_Sankhāra aniccā_. R. _Dukkhā_. R. _Anattā_. R.

_Viānam aniccam_. R. _Dukkhā_. R. _Anattā_. R. (_Sam_.-2: 17-18).

_Navame **ko pana vādo paccuppannassā**ti paccuppannahmi kathāva kā anicca- meva tam_. _Te kira bhikkhu atītānāgatam aniccanti sanlakkhattvā paccuppanne kilamimsu_, _atha nesam ito atītānāgatepi_ “_paccuppannam aniccan_”_ti vuccamāne byjjhisantīti ajjhāsayam viditvā sattā puggalajjhāsayena imam desam desesi_ (_Sam_.-_Ttha_.-

2: 242).

_Dasamekādasamāni **dukkham anattā**ti padehi visesetvā tathārūpeneva puggalejjāsayena kathitāni_ (_Sam_.-_Ttha_.-2: 242).

_Yadi atītānāgatam etarahi anattibhāvato aniccam_, _paccuppannampi tadā natthīti **ko pana vādo** tassa aniccāya_, **\*paccuppannahmi kathāva kā** udayabbayaparicchannattā\*

 _tassa_. _Vuttam hetam_ “_nibbattā ye ca titthanti_, _āragge sāsapūpamā_”_ti_ (_Sam_.-_Tī_.2: 213). Bhikkus …. _Rūpa_ which is the past and future is the _anicca_ (_dukkha_. _anatta_).

And the present _rūpa_ is not an exception. Bikkhus …. The nature of _anicca_ (of _dukkha_ and of _anatta_), realized by own knowledge referred to as _āgamasuta_, knowledge via practice referred to as _adhigamasuta_, are possessed by followers *sāvaka*s (or *ariyasāvaka*s). They do not linger on to the past _rūpa_ nor have enjoyment or anticipation for the future _rūpa_. They practice on the present _rūpa_ to be relieved of interest, attachment and for acquirement of, its dissolution. (Note that the same applies to _vedanā_ etc.) (_Sam_.2: 17 – 18).

These bhikkhus have already analytically understood the past and future *rūpa*s (_vedanā_, _saññā_, _sankhāra_, _viññāna_) as _anicca_ (as _dukkha_, as _anatta_), and on the present *rūpa*s (_vedanā_, _saññā_, _sankhāra_, _viññāna_) they become tired of, and disinterested in

them. Then the bhikkhus are instructed by the Buddha that from the present to the past and future are all _anicca_. Following this admonition, as the Buddha already knows the _ijjāsayadhātu_ by which these bhikkhus could analytically realized the fact that the present _rūpa_ (_vedanā_, _saññā_, _sankhāra_, _viññāna_) is the _aniica_ (_dukkha_, _anatta_), this _desanā_ was given corresponding to the _ajjhāsaya_ wish of the believers (_Sam_.-*Tth*a.-2: 242).

Suppose the past and future _khandhās_ are _anicca_ because of the fact that do not they exist in the present, the present _khandhās_ would be more so (_anicca_, _dukkha_ and _anatta_) as they did not and would not exist in the past and future too. This is because being present of the present *khandhā*s is divided as arising and perishing phases by means of _udayabbaya_. – “_Nibbattā ye ca ti_._t_._t_ _hanti_, _āragge sāsapūmā_ = these *khandhā*s exist as distinct appearance of mustard seed.s on the sharp edge of a chisel” (_Khu_.-7: 32) was the instruction. – Note it this way (_Sam_.-_T_. _ī_.-2: 213).

To free oneself from attachment and clinging to the past and future *khandhā*s, _vipassanā_ must be exercised on these *khandhā*s of the past and future.

**The Meaning of the Present in Baddekaratta Suttana**

Here the meaning of the present described in Baddekaratta suttana division into the past-future-present of the five-fold _khandhās_ in the doctrines will be given. First, the opening of the Atthasālinī atthakathā.

_Paccuppannañca nāmetam tividham khanapaccuppannam_, _santatipaccuppannam_, _addhāpaccuppannañca_. \*Ekadvisantativārapariyāpa**nnam santatipaccuppanam\***. R. _Ekabhavaparicchanam pana **addāpaccuppannam** nāma_. _Yam sandhāya **baddekaratta- sutte –** “yo cā vuso mano_, _ye ca dhamma_, _ubhayametam paccuppannam_, _tasamim ce_

_paccuppanne chandarāgapatibaddham hoti viññānam_, _chandarāgapatibaddhattā viññā- nassa tadabhinandanti_, _tadabhinandato paccuppannesu dhammesu samhīratī_”_ti vuttam_. _Santatipaccuppannañcatta atthakathāsu āgatam_, _addhāpaccuppane sutte (Abhi_.-*Ttha.-*1:

445).

The _paccuppam_ object is of three kinds as follows.\*

1. _Khana paccuppam_
1. _Santati paccuppam_
1. _Addhā paccuppam_
1. Of these three, the formative stage, corresponding to various causes, by _upāda_-_tthī_- _bhañga_ = _citta_-_cetasikka_ _dhamma_ groups, which are at the arising-static-perishing away phases, are _khanapaccuuppanna_.
1. The processes of _rūpa_ and _nāma_ are called _santati_. Included in the _rūpasantati_ process arising as a result of one _utu_ and one _ahāra_, two _utu_ and two _ahāra_, and the _citta_ and _cetasika nāma dhamma_ groups coincident with one and two thought processes, are _santatipaccuppana_.
1. The _rūpanāma_ distinguished within a certain existence is the _addhāpaccuppanna_. Referring to this addhāpaccuppanna the Venerable Mahākaccé has admonished in

 the **_Mahākaccāna_ – _Baddekaratta suttana_**_ as follows._\_\_

“My colleague bhikkhus …. A certain _citta_ referred to as mental clear element does exist as do certain _dhamma_ object groups. This _mana_-_dhamma_ object as a pair is the _addhāpaccuppanna_. Suppose the _viññāna_, associated with and attached to the longing _ragachandhā_, arises, then because of the association of this mental property _viññāna_ with longing _chandarāga_, that _mana_-_dhamma_ object will be clung to (by that individual). One who is so delighted in _mana_-_dhamma_ object will be attracted to present

*dhamma*s by the _tahnā_-_ditthi_ (_Ma_.-3: 237).

Among these three kinds of present, the _santatipaccuppanna_ is described in the Commentary, and the _addhāpaccuppanna_ in B**addekaratta suttana** (_Abhi_-_Ttha_.-1: 445). Relevant to the above Pāli and Commentary, note that the present (_paccuppanna_), described in the **Baddekaratta suttana** refers to all five-fold _khandhā_ (the 12 *āyatana*s) appearing throughout the existence extending from the five-fold _patisandhekhandhā_ to the five-fold _cutikhandhā_. Therefore in these *addhāpaccuppanna dhamma*s are included not only the five-fold _khandhā_ that is formed today, but also those of yesterday and of the day before yesterday etc. up to the five-fold _patisandhekhandhā_ throughout the life of an individual. In the same way, not only the five-fold _khandhā_ that will arise today, but those arising tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, coming month, year and until death also. It should be noted that the meaning of the present used here is different from that used in everyday language.

The consciousness, the _viññāna_ which is the wishful clinging attached to the six object or five-fold _khandhā_ in association with _chandarāga_ = it is difficult for arising of _mana_ on the *khanapaccuppanna dhamma*s which have attained _khanattaya_, called _upāda-tthī-bhañga_, in knowledge and which have acquired vision at _paramatta_ level. The _tahnā_-_ditthi_ are most likely to occur on the _rūpa_-_nāma_ five-fold *khandhā dhamma*s, called _addhāpaccuppanna_, designated by a certain existence. For this reason the Com- mentators have explained that the _paccuppanna_ in Baddekaratta suttanas are just the five- fold _khandhā rūpa_-*nāma dhamma*s in a _bhava_ designated by a certain existence. These explanations, however, are made only in light of **_suttantapariyāyana_ method**, not the **_abhidhammanissena_ method.** Therefore, the concept of the _paccuppanna_ is also given in the light of _suttantapariyāyana_ and _abhidhammanissena_ methods.

**Designation of the Past, Future and Present**

_Yam kañci rūpam atītamnāgatapaccuppannam ijjhattam vā bahiddhā vā olārikam vā hīnam vā panītam vā yam dūre santike vā_, _tadekajjham abhisamyūhitvā ayam vuccati rūpakkhandho_. _Yā kāci vedanā_. _Yā kāci saññā_. _Ye keci sankhāra_. _Yam kañci viññā- nam atīnāgatapaccuppannam_. R. _Abhisañkhipitvā_ _ayam vuccati viññānakkhandho_

(_Abhi_.-2: 1 – 10).

_Idam pana atītānāgatapaccuppannam nāma suttantapariyāyato abhidhammaniddesatoti duvidham_. _Tam suttantaparoyāye bhaven paricchanam_. _Patisandhito hi patthāya_

_atītabhavesu nibbattam rūpam anantarabhave vā nibbattam hotu kappakotisatasahassa-_

_mattake vā_. _Sabbam anāgatameva nāma_. _Cutipatisandhiantare pavattarūpam paccuppannam nāma_ (_Abhi_.-_Ttha_.-2: 7).

**Translation of the Above Pāli**

There are the *rūpa dhamma*s of past-future-present durations, all the *rūpa dhamma*s of _ijjhattasantāna_, _bahiddhasantāna_, gross _olārika_ nature, subtle _sukhuma_ nature, lower and higher levels, the distant (from consciousness) _dūrarūpa_, the near (the

consciousness) _santirūpa_. These 11 kinds of _okāsa_ = indicative of the locality, that which make all the *rūpa*s subject to change, the 11 kinds which are grouped in brief by way of _ruppalakkhanā_, of all the *rūpadhamman*s = are all called _rūpakkhandhā_. (N.B. The same holds true for the _nāmakhandhās_) (_Abhi_.-2: 1: 10).

It must be noted that, according to this Pāli, all the _rūpa_ *dhamma*s existing as 11 kinds are called _rūpakkhandhā_.

**The _Suttanta Pariyāya_ Way**

_Pariyāya_ refers to that which has changed from the _Paramatthasabhāvadhamma_. It has named as _suttanta pariyāya_ way because the _suttana desanā_ is _pariyāya desanā_. In the _abhidhammā_, it has been expounded as “_phassa-vedanā_” etc., and such an expatiation has been given as”_abhidhammaniddesa_.”

This past, future and present _rūpa_ are of two kinds:

1. _Suttantapariyāya_ which has changed from _paramatthasabhāvadhamma_ = the _suttanadesanā_ way,
1. Determined in the _abhidhammā_ and expatiated as _abhidhammaniddesa_ = _abhi_-

 _dhammadesanā_ way.

In the _suttantapariyāya_ which has changed from _paramatthasabhāvadhamma_ the past-future-present *rūpa*s delineated by an existence. The following is how it is deli- neated.

1. From _patisandhe_ to all the *rūpa*s that have existed in the past – be it in the second

life in the past, the life in the _asañkhata_ period – are the *rūpa*s of the past.

2. From this _cutibhava_ to the *rūpa*s to be formed in the future life, be it formed in

the in second past existence or the life in the _asañkhata_ period, are all the future *rūpa*s.

3. The *rūpa*s, formed during the existence spanning from this _bhava cuti_ to this _bhava patisandhe_, are all _paccuppanna_ *rūpa*s (_Abhi_.-_Ttha_.-2: 7).

**The Abhidhammaniddesa Way**

_Abhidhammaniddesa pana khanena paricchannam_. _Tayo hi rūpassa khanā uppādo tthiti bhañgoti_. _Ime tayo khane patvā niruddham rūpam samantaraniruddham vā hotu atīte kappakotisatasahassamatthake vā_, _sabbam atītemeva nāma_. _Tayo khane asampattam rūpam etacittakkhanamattena vā asampatam hotu anāgate kappakotisatasahassa mattake vā_, _sabbam anāgatemeva nāma_. _Ime tayo khane sampattam rūpam pana paccuppannam_

_nāma_. _Tattha kañcāpi idam suttantabhājanīyam_, _evum santepi abhidhammaniddeseneva atītānāgatapaccuppannarūpam nidditthanti veditabbam_ (_Abhi_.-_Ttha_.-2: 7) _Abhidhammaniddesa_ = In _abhidhamma desanā_, the past, future and present are

divided by moment. The following is how it is divided.

The momentary moment of _rūpa dhamma_ are of three kinds:

1. The arising _upādakhana_,
1. The static _tthīkhana_, and
1. the perishing away _bhañkhana_.

These are the three _khanas_.

1. The _rūpa_ which has ceased after arriving at these three *khana*s has perished, there being no other alternative (= there is no other _rūpa_), be it that which has already ceased or be it that which had ceased in the past of _asañkhata_ period; and any *rūpa*s that have already ceased are all that of the past.
2. The _rūpa_ which has not yet arrived at the three *khana*s, be it the _rūpa_ which has not arrive even at a certain _cittakhana_, be it the _rūpa_ which will be formed in a future of an _asañkh ata_ period, any _rūpa_ which has not yet arrived at the three *khana*s still belong to the future.
3. All the *rūpa*s which have, and still are, at the three *khana*s are the _paccuppanna_

 _rūpas_. It should be known this way (_Abhi_.-_Ttha_.-2: 7).

**A Fact that Should be Understood.**

_Tattha kañcāpi idam suttantabhājanīyam_, _evum santepi abhidhammaniddeseneva atītānāgatapaccuppananrūpam nidditthanti veditabba,_ (_Abhi_.-_Ttha_.-2: 7). **\*Kañcāpī**tiādisu ayamadippāyo* – *suttantabhājanīyatthā* “*atītam nānvāgameyā*”*tiādisu* (*Ma*.-3: 266). *Addhāvasena atītādibhāvova vutto*, *tathā idhāpi niddisitabbo siyā*. *Evum santepi suttantabhājanīyampi abhidhammadesanāyeva suttante vuttadhammevicinitvā vibhajanavasena pavattāti abhidhammaniddeseneva atītādibhāvo nidditthoti* (*Mūlatī\*-2: 6).

**\*Baddekarattasuttā**dīsu viya atītādibhāvo atītānāgatapaccuppannabhāvo addhāvasena idhāpi khandhavibhañge suttantabhājanīyattā niddhititabbo siyāti yojanā* (*Anutī\*.-2:12)

The following gives the meaning of these _atthakathā tīkā_.

Of these two _suttantapariyāya_ and _abhidhammaniddesa_ ways, _khandhāvibhañ_- _bhājaniya_ of this treatment is _suttantabhājaniya_ way. As the nature of the past, future and present are exhorted by designating via an existence by power of _addhā_, so should the nature of past, future and present be designated via an existence by power of _addhā_ only. Although it should be so, the _suttantabhājaniya dhamma_, like **_Baddekarattasut_- _tana_,** is a kind of **_Abhidhamma desanā_** which appears by the power of analytical selection of individual objects of _paramattha vipassanā ñāna_. Therefore, it must be noted that the Buddha has exhorted on the past, future and present via _Abhidhamma_- _niddesa_ way (_Abhi_.-_Ttha_.-2: 7; _Anutī_.-2:12).

[Note. According to the explanation given by the above doctrines the five-fold *khandhā*s of the past, future and present have been instructed to be designated via an existence by the power of _addhā_. It means that it the _suttantabhājanīya_ way. But though it is the _suttantabhājanīya_ way, it is a kind of _abhidhamā desanā_ which analyze the *dhamma*s that have been expatiated by way of analytical examination. Because of this, it must be remembered that the Buddha has instructed the five-fold *khandhā*s of the past, future and present just by _abhidhamā desanā_ way.

**Another Explanation**

_Aparo yano_ – _idañhi rūpam addhā-santati-samaya-khanavasena catudhā atītam nāma hoti_. _Tathā anāgatapaccuppannam_. **\*Addhāvasena** tāva ekassa ekassamañ bhave patisandhito pubbe atītam*, *cutito uddham anāgatam*, *ubannamantare paccuppannam*. *Santativasena sabhāgaekautusamutthānam ekāhārasamutthānañca pubbāpariya-\*

_vasena pavuttamānampi paccuppannam_, _tato pubbe visabhāgautuāhārasamutthānam atītam_, _paccā anāgatam_. _Cittajam ekavīthi-ekajavana-ekasamāpattisamutthānam_

_paccuppannam_, _tato pubbe atītam_, _pacchā anāgatam_. _Kammasamutthānassa pātiyak-_

_kam santativasena atītādibhedo natthi_, _tesaññeva pana utuāhāracittasamutthānam upatthaambhakavasena tassa atītādibhedo (=atītādibhāvo) veditabbo_. **\*Samayavasena** ekamuhuttapubbahnasāyanarattidivādīsu samayesu santānavasena pavuttamānam tam tam samayam paccuppannam nāma*, *tato pubbe atītam*, *pacchā anāgatam\*.

**\*Khanavasena** uppādādikhanattayapariyāpannam paccuppannam nāma*. *Tato pubbe atītam pacchā anāgatam\*.

_Apica atikkantahetupaccayakiccan atītam_, _nitthitahetukiccam anitthitapaccayakiccam paccuppanam_, _ubhayakiccam asampattam anāgatam_. _Sakiccakkhane vā paccuppan-_

_nam_, _tato pubbe atītam_, _pacchā anāgatam._

_Ettha ca khanādikathāva nipariyāyā_, _sesā sapariyāyā_. _Tāsu nipariyāyakathā idha adhippetā_ (_Abhi_.-_Ttha_.-2: 7 – 8; V*isuddhi*-2: 103).

What the above doctrines actually mean is as follows. –

1. _Addhā_ = the period referred to as _Bhava_,
1. _Santati_ = the continuity,
1. _Samaya_ = time (period of time),
1. _Khana_ = moment which occurs as _upāda_-_tthī_-_bhañ_, all in four by virtue of which\* the past is designated.

The future and present are designated in the same way.

**The Period Denoted as _Addhā_ (= _Bhava_)**

 Of the four _addhā_-_santati_-_samaya_-_khana_ categories, the **_addhā_**-_saddā_ is the time referred to as an existence designated by _cuti patisanddhe_.

**“_Ahosim nu kho atītamaddhā nam_.”** (_Ma_.-1: 10; _Sam_.-1: 256).

“Had I been formed at the time of the past existence.”

 In this way it can be known, by power of _suttana desanā_ way, from exhortation made in the Nidānavaggasamyutta, Ãhāravaga, Paccaya Suttana etc. that the _addhā saddā_ arises at a time of a certain existence delineated by _cuti patisandhe_.

In another way –

_Tayome bhikkhave addhā_, _katame tayo_? _Atīto addhā_, _anāgato addhā_, _paccup- panno addhā_ (_Khu_.-1: 232; _Dī_.-3: 181).

Bhikkhus …. The three periods are these. They are the past, future and present.

 In this Pāli, by virtue of Khandhavaggasamyutta, Upayavaga, Niruttipatha suttana, the meaning of _addhā_-_saddā_ as given by designating moment of _upāda_-_tthī_-_bhañ_ = arising-static-perishing away of _paramatta_ is pertinent from view point of _paramat_._t_._h_ _a_.

It is so because in the **_Niruttapathasuttana_** is given as

_Yam_. _bhikkhave rūpam_. _jātam_. _pātubhūtam_., “_atthī_”_ti tassa sañkhā_ (_Sam_. .-2: 60).

Bhikkhus …. That _rūpa_ is still arising, clearly appearing. Recognition of the

.

actual existence of that _rūpa_ by name arises (_Sam_.-2: 60).

In the **\*Niruttapatha** suttana* expatiation has been made of the distinctly arising *rūpa\* _dhamma_ in the state of _upāda_-_t_.._thī_-_bhañ_ as the present _rūpa_, as past _rūpa_ which has arisen long before the still existing present _rūpa_, and as the future _rūpa_ going to arise after the present.

 Therefore, the following two kinds of period have been given in the _suttana_ _desanā_.

1. An _addhā_ as a kind of period, referred to as an existence designated by the _cuti_ _pantisandhe_ (= a time of existence)
1. An (_khana_) _addhā_ (= a period called _khana_) designated by the prevailing _khana_

 called _upāda_-_t_.._thī_-_bhañ_ = arising-static-perishing away of the *paramatta*s.

Although these two _addhā_ are described in the *suttana desanā*s, the Buddha has admonished in the _suttana_ and _pāli_ that the past, future and present existences are designated by _cuti patisandhe_ and _bhava_ referred to as _addhā_ period.

Following the general exhortation the _atthakathā sayādaw_ has explained the

PAGE137

designation of the past, future and present in another way.
ūūūūū

1. **_Addhā_** – at a certain time during the existence of a certain living being, all the *rûpa*s from the stage of _patisandhe_ of the prevailing _bhava_ to the past belong to the past *rûpa*s. The *rûpa*s spanning from the _cuti_ of this _bhava_ to those of the coming existence are all the future *rûpa*s. The *rûpa*s midway between the the past and future are all the present ones.
1. If stated by virtue of _santati_ (continuity), it will be as follows.
   ūūūūū
   A certain _rûpa_ which arises due to a certain relevant _utu_ as the cause, and to a certain _ahāra_ as a cause, might have done so by virtue of whether the long past or later, but is still the present _rûpa_. (It indicates that _sabhāgaekautusamu_._t_._thānarûpa_, _sabhāga- ekaahārasamu_._t_._thānarûpa_ is the _paccuppana rûpa_).
   ū
   The _sabhāgaekautusamutthāna_, the _visabhāgautusamutthānarûpa_ prior to the _sa-_ .. ..
   ūūū
   _bhāgaekāhārasamut_._t_._hānarûpa_ = irrelevant _utu_ as the cause, _visabhāgaāhārasamut_._t_._hāna- rûpa_ = irrelevant _āhāra_ as the cause is the _rûpa_ that belongs to the past.
   ūūūū
   The _sabhāgaekautusamutthāna_, the _visabhāgautusamutthānarûpa_ after the _sabhā- gaekāhārasamut_._t_._h_ _ānarûpa_ = irrelevant _utu_ as the cause, _visabhāgaāhārasamut_._t_._h_ _āna- rûpa_ = irrelevant _āhāra_ as the cause is the _rûpa_ that belongs to the future.

**_Sabhāutu – āhāra Ekautu – āhāra_**
ū
_Sītam_. _sītassa sabhāg_._o_, _tathāunham_. _vā sītam_. _unham_.. _unhassa_. . _Yam_. _pana_. _sītam_. _un_._ham_. _v_._ā sarīre sannipatitam santānavasena pavattamānam anûnam anad_._hikam_ ._ekakār_._am_, _tam_
ūū
_eko utûti vuccati_. _Sabhāgautuno anekantasabhāvato ekagahanam katam_, _evum āhārepi_ (_Mûla_._tī_.-2: 6).

**\*Santāvasenā**ti pubbāparavasena\*. _Pubbenāparassa samappamānatāya **anu anadhikam**_**.**,\_

-   .

\*tato eva **ekākāram\***. _Tena visabhāgautunā anantarikatam dasseti_ (_Anu_._tī_.-2: 12).

**_Sabhāgautu_** — the cold _sītautu_ is the _sabhāgadhamma_ being relevant to _sītautu_.

 In the same way, the hot _unhautu_ is the _sabhāgautu_ being relevant to _unhautu_.

**_Ekautu_** — A combination of cold _sītautu_, and hot _unhautu_ affecting the body together, or if a certain _uhnautu_ arises by virtue of association of the former and later
ū
*rûpa*s in a continuous process, a .c.e rtain phenomenon exists wh.i.c h is of its original nature, but no more nor less than it. That _utu_ is referred to as _ekautua_ = a particular kind of _utu_.  
ūūū
(The _utu_ that is exerting its effect on the material body is a continuous process of that of the former and later *rûpa*s. If that _utu_ would be measured by a thermometer, it would neither be less nor more, but remains constant throughout, and such an _utu_ is the _ekautu_ = said to be an _utu_. For example, if a cold _sītarûpa_ process occurs continuously for an hour, then the continuity of the process of physical _utu_ in that duration will neither be more nor less, but constant; and so would be the hot _uhnarûpa_ process). Such a natural _dhamma_, because it has the same nature, should be taken as a factor of single phenomenon. This statement as _ekakāram_ = singleness of phenomenon, vindicates the non-existance of dissimilar nature of _sabhāgautu_.
ū
Within this _sabhāgautu_, however, the *utu*s (the physical changes), which are the _pramatthadhamma sabhāva_, are occurring in many ways. The *utujarûpa*s are arising and dissolving. Within a _sabhāgautu_ many *paramatthadhammasabhāva*s conspicuously are present, anf this situation might mislead one to take **_sabhāgautu_** as **_anekautu_**. To avoid this misconception, the _atthakat_._t_._h_ _ā sayādaw_ has expatiated as **_ekautusamut_._t_._h_ _ānam_** by inclusion of _eka_-_saddā_ to make one understand via process of continuity just a single _utu_.

-   .

..
PAGE138

**\*E**sū**v**b**u**h**m**ā g**ā**e**h**k**ā**ā**r**h**e**ā**p**r**i**atim* .*i\* _t tnhāam vai_._s_ _a_ “_bThaātgoā phuābrbene av iasnaabnhtāagraituot uaānheākaravsāarmamut athnāenkaamd_. _i vaatīstaamm_. _p_, _ip bahccuhttāo anāgatan_”_ti hivuttanti_. “_Ekāhārasamu_._t_._t_ _hānan_”_ti pana vuttattā ekasseva āhārassa yojanā_

_yuttarûpāti pare_ (_Anu_.ūt\* _ī_.-2:ū12).

In this _āhārasamutthāna rûpa_ also Mûlatīkāsayādaw has instructed the idea of _ekāhāra_ to be taken in a si.m. ilar way to the above. The food that is consumed many times

and many days, and irrelevent to _visabhāgaāhāra_, is an _āhāra_ of ū certain kind. ūū

Therefore, in the _atthakathā_, it has been explained that – “the _rûpa_ resulting from the s*abhāgaekautusamu*._t_._t_ _h_._ā_. _na rûpa_ and _sabhāgaekāhārasamut_._t_._h_ _āna rûpa_ formed due to

previous _vibāga_-_āhāra_, belongs to the past, and that formed later to the futureū” ū

But, because the _atthakathā_ ūhas indicated as **\*ekāhārasamutthānam** aū rûpa\* resulting from a certain āhā.r.a , the ***aūpare saya*s\*** have instructed that t**.**h**.**e\*\* _rûpa_ resulting

from a single _āhāra_ within a _rûpakalāpa_ is the _ekāhārasamut_._t_._h_ _āna rûpa_ = only when described comparatively as the _rûpa_ resulting from a certain _āhāra_, it will be relevent.

[The honorable _tīkā sayādaw_, named Ãcariyadhammapāla, has exhorted this **_vāda_** of the **honorable _apar_**.**_e_** **_sayās_** in the ūast part of the explanation, it should noted in ūūūūūūūū

essence that it was madū so because they have ūhe will for some one to note in that way. In the present book too, when explanation was made of _rûpaghana_ and _nāmaghana_ in the section on _santatighana_, ūrûpa*s are described as the results a certain *utu* and an *āhāra*. The *utuja rûpa*s which have come to result step by step because of *tejo dhatu* within a *rûpa kalāpa*, which is like *cakkhudasaka kalāpa*, are the *rûpa dhamma*s resulting from the a certain single *utu*. So also, like the *cakkhudasaka kāpa*, the *āhārajarûpa*s, resulting step by step by support of the *ojā* of the *ojāka āhārajarûpa*s, are the *rûpa dhamma*s resulting from a certain single *utu*. In cultivating and *vipassanā* exercising on these *rûpa dhamma*s as instructed this way until attainment of *khana paccuppana*, of acquiring eye of wisdom to arrive at *paramat*.*t*.*h\* _a_, and only when the _paramat_._t_._h_ _a_ is so attained will the light of anatta brilliantly shine.]

This is how the *utujarûpa*s and the *āhārja rûpa*s of the past, future and present times are designated by the power of _santati_. The designation of the past, future and present times of the *cittajarûpa*s by virtue of _santati_ is as follows.

**_Santati_ of _Cittasamutthāna_**

The mūterial phenomenon of consciousness p**..**r\*\* oduced from mind are called
ū

1. _Rūpa_ formed of a certain five door process,
1. _Rûpa_ formed of a certain mind-door process,
1. _Rûpa_ formed of aūcertain _samāpatti_ = _samāpattivīthi_ as the cause, are all the \*
    _paccuppana rûpa_. ūū

The previous material phenomenon of mind formed of a certain five-door process,_ that_ formed of a certain mind-door process, and that formed of a certain _samāpatta_ is the _rûpa_ of the past. The material phenomenon of mind that is produced later is the _rûpa_ of the future.

**.. _Santati_ of _Kammasamutthaāna_** ū

The _kamma_-produced _kammasamutthāna rûpa_ by virtue of the _santati_ process which are not defferentiated as of the pas..t , present and future respectively. (What it

means is that because the material phenomenon formed of _kamma_ is produced by the previous _kamma_ there is no variation in the _santati_.). With respect to this assertion, it

PAGE142
ū
should be noted that differentiation ūf the past, future and present by power of which
ū

1. _Utusamutthana rûpa_ (= material phenomenon formed of physical change),
1. _Ãhārasam_.._u_ _t_._t_._h_ _āna rûpa_ (= material phenomenon formed of nutrition),
1. _Cittasamu_._t_._t_ _hāna rûpa_ (= material phenomenon formed of consciousness) can be
   ūū
   produced.
   ū
   After describing the past, future and present *rûpa*s which are produced by power of _santati_, the _at_._t_._h_ _akathā_ has explained the differentiation of the past, future and present *rûpa*s by power of _samaya_.

**Designation of the Past-Future-Present *Rûpa*s by Power of _Samaya_**

1. One _muhutta_ (suddenly),
1. Morning time,
1. Evening time,
1. Night time, ūū
1. Day time, etc.

ptmhreeod cpTieathsassett oH , *r*ar e*û*salrl *p*npe b*a*d,e e ūtplefhoorxoonrpscmgleea itsntnohsag eapt sit ro *v*ewpn*i*s*p*rsieol*a* nld*s* htbuūs*.a e*a*c vT *n*efed*a*oh* reb*k*dm e*ar*u*û*ee*m*rnd*p*i*a*n *a*l*t*.ggas*t*. _h_ titfev*a*hore*n*e rnbms*a* ee eel ion*s*dx*a*n ei*m*ogrnc l *a*tdiaos*y*e e s*a*rt ih om=e*a*n i _t_. flp*t*.vau*h* eart.*a*r u.rwi*k* iroo*a*eadu*t*.y*h*s s _ā_ pbfsary ec ivtvnoii orrstsuu usaepls ypso ooafc lrltti h abteoee fld*s* o*a* tnwh*n*go*t*i*a* tsth*t*oe*i* _santati_ and those associated with _samaya_. In this context –

1. _Samaya_ =ūby power of _santati_, but not considering the time period –
1. Not considering the _santati_, but by power of _samaya_, the *rûpa*s of the past, future and present should be analytically differentiated (_Mûla_._tī_ .-2: 7; _Anut_._ī_ .-2: 12).
   ū
   _Paccuppannarûpam_. _nāma jātam_. _khanattayapariyāpannanti attho_. _Tam_. _pana ādito duppariggahanti santatipaccuppannavasena vipassanābhiniveso_. _k_. _ātabbo_ (_Mahā_._tī-2:419)_
   ū
   In accordance with the explanation of this _tīkā_, _rûpa_ which is appearing, complete
   ū
   with the three minor _khanas_ such as _upāda_-._t_._t_ _hī_-_bh_._añ_, is referred to as _rûpa_ of the present from point of view of _udayabbaya ñān_._a_. For a beginner, an _ādikammika_ individual,

recognizing this _paccuppanna rûpa_ analytically is very difficult. To begin with, there-

fore, taking to heart via _vipassanā_ by virtue of _santatipaccuppanna_ must be exercised.
ū

-   . .
    ū
    _Tassa yadā ñānam tikkham visadam hutvā pavattati_, _tadā rûpadhammo khane khane uppajjantā_, _bhijjantā ca hutvā upat_._t_._h_ _ahanti_ (_Mahāt_._ī_.-2: 422).
    ū
    In this way the mind of that meditator will become clear and active. Then in his knowledge will appear the recognition of the arising and perishing away of the _rûpa_ *dhamma*s and and *nāma dhamma*s with every passing moment (_Mahā_._tī_.-2: 422).

Therefore, the _santatipaccuppana_ and _samayapaccuppana_ are very helpful to attain the _khanapaccuppanna_ of the _rûpa-nāmaparamatta_ through the eye of wisdom. For this reason the terms _santatikathā_ and _samayakathā_ have been explained by the older _a_._t_._t_ _hakathā sayadaws_. In Pāli, however, direct mention has been made only of the two kinds: the _addhā_ and _khana_.
ūūū
**Division of the Past-Future-Present by Way of _Khana_**

The _rûpa_ that belongs to the three minor _khanas_ as _upāda_-_t_._t_._h_ _ī_-_bhañ_ is that of the present. That which was formed prior to this _rûpa_ is that of the past, and all the *rûpa*s

..

that would be formed after the present belong to the future (_Abhi-ttha.-2_: 7 - 8; _Visuddhi_- 2: 113).
ūūū
**Explained in Another Way**
ūū
The rûpa of previous _hetukicca_ and _paccayakicca_ belongs to the past. The _rûpa_ which is of accomplished _hetukicca_, but _paccayakicca_ yet to accomplish, belongs to the present. When both _hetukicca_ and _paccayakicca_ are not yet accomplished, then the _rûpa_ belongs to the future.
ū
Or the _rûpa_ still arising while at the moment of performing its _kicca_ is that of the present. That which is of the time perior to the present is of the past. The _rûpa_ that is formed later belongs to the future.
ū
The _janaka_ cause which can directly produce the *rûpa dhamma*s is the _hetu_ cause. The _upatthambhaka_ cause which provides support is the _paccaya_ cause.
ūū
_Janaka_ (= _hetu_) which as a cause directly produces the _rûpa_ is the _hetu_ function. The provision of support by _upatthambhaka_ as a cause (_paccaya_ cause) is the _paccya_ function.
ū
For example production of a sprout is the function of a fertile seed. Water-soil- _utu_ (= _pathavīrasa_-_āporasa_-sunlight), which provide support in production of the sprout, is the function of water, soil, utu etc. (This is a example from mundane point of view). _nāma_ is*K* t*a*h*t*.e*a* *t*f*t*u*ā*n*r*c*û*t*p*io*a*n o fo f*k* *a*th*m*i*m*s _kaa_ =_m_ t*m*h*a*e .f o Trmhea tsiuopnp oofr t*k* *a*p*m*ro*m*v*a*id-epdro bdyu ctehde _rāûhpāar_ *a*a nedtc t.h ien rtehseu lptaron-t
ūūūūūūūū
duction of the _kamma_-produced _rûpa_ and the resultant _nāma_ is the function of this _āhāra_. (This is an example from _sāsanā_ point of view).
ūūū
Similar to the above examples, a certain _rûpakalāpa_ and a certain _cittuppāda_, referred to as mind and mental concomitant = _kamma_ which is a _janaka_ force that can directly produce _kamma_-produced _rûpa_ and the resultant _nāma_. Thus providing support by means of _paccaya_ forces such as the _nānākkhanikakamma_ force, _upanissaya_ force and _āhāra_ force. In these resultant _rûpa_-*nāma dhamma*s too, the four-fold *nāmakhandhā*s and *paramatta dhamma*s are reciprocating each other by way of _paccaya_ forces such as _sahajāta_ etc.. The four great elements of _bhûtarûpa_ are supporting each other, as the _bhûtarûpa_ is supporting the _upādārûpa_, by way of _paccaya_ forces such as _sahajāta_ etc..

In this way, the _rûpa_ which is arising and* at the moment of performing its own function such as *hetukicca* (= *janakakicca*), *upatthambhakakicca* (= *paccayakicca*), is the present *rûpa*. The *rûpa* prior to this belongs to the past and that about to be formed to the future. (*Mula*.*t\* _ī_.-2: 7; _Anu_._t_ _ī_.-2: 12 – 13).

**Certainty and _Pariyāya_**

_It_._t_._h_ _a ca khanādikathāva nippariyāyā_, _sesā pariyāyā_ (_Abhi_.-_T_.._t_ *ha.-*2: 8; _Visuddhi_-2: 203). In designation of the past, future and present, the terms _khanakathā_ and _kiccakathā_ are not _pariyāya_ but are the terms of certainty. The remaining terms such as –

1. _Addhākathā_ = a term related to time period of a _bhava_,
1. _Santatikathā_ = a term related to continuity,
1. _Samayakathā_ = a term related to time – are the terms accompanied by _pariyāya_.

Among various terms, the certainty but not the _pariyāya_, is what is required in this Vibhañpāli (_Abhi_.-_T_.._t_ _ha_.-2: 8).

**The Designation of the Past-Future-Present in _Nāma_**

_Atītādivibhāge panattha santativasena khanādivasena ca vedanāya atītānāgata- paccupppannabhāvo veditabbo_. _Tattha **santativasena** ekavīthiekajavanaekasammapatti_-

..

_pariyāpannā ekavīthivisayasamāyogappavattā ca paccuppannā_, _tato pubbe atītā_, _pacchā anāgatā_. **\*Khanādivasena** khanattaya pariyāpannā pubbantāparantamajjattagatā sakiccañca kurumāna vedanā paccuppannā*, *tato pubbe atītā*, *pacchā anāgatā* (*Visuddhi*- 2: 104; *Abhi*.-*Ttha\*.-2: 8).

 Here, in discrimitating the past, future and present _santati_ = by virtue of continuity and of _khana_-_kicca_, the state of being the past, future and present of the _vedanā_ (the four- fold _khandhās_).

Then it could be stated from point of view of _santati_ as follows.

1. _Vedanā_ related to one of five-door processes,
1. _Vedanā_ related to one of mind-door processes,
1. _Vedanā_ related to a certain _samāpatti_,
1. The unique feature of the Buddha as the only object of corporeality, the sound of recitation of _desanā_ as the only object of sense of hearing etc., the object received by the five-fold door processes, and the _vedanā_ that are included in _tadanuvattika_, mind-door processes etc. which still take them as the object, are the *paccuppanna vedanā*s. Those that were prior to these belong to the past, and those to be formed

 later belong to the future.

If stated in relation to _khana_-_kicca_, it will be as follows.

 The *vedanā*s associated with the three *khana*s, such as _upā_._d_. _a_-_tthī_-_bhañ_, are all _paccuppanna vedanās_. The *vedanā*s produced prior to those associated with these

three *khana*s are of the past, and those arising after those associated with these three

 *khana*s are of the future.

The *vedanā*s produced between the front end, the _upāda_, and the hind end, the _bhañ_, i.e., *vedanā*s associated with the three *khana*s, and located midway between that prior to or after it, which are still in arising state and performing its own functions, are the *paccuppanna vedanā*s. The *vedanā*s which have arisen before these are of the past and those that are going to arise aftward are of the future (_Abhi_.-_T_.._t_ _ha_.-2: 13; _Visuddhi_-2: 104)
ūū
Note that it is the same in the remaining three *nāmakhandhā*s as in the case of the *vedanakkhandhā*s. This how the the past, future and present are appreciated in the five- fold *khandhā*s. **.**
ūū
**_Bhûtam Bhûtato Passati_**
ūūūūūūū
_Bhûtam bhûtato passati_ = seeing things as they really are. With reference to this _desanā_, some have conceived that _vipassanā_ exercise should be made with emphasis only on the _paccuppanna_. Now the explanation will be made as to what this _desanā_ really means.
ūūū
_Katth_. _añca bhikkhave cakkhumanto passanti? Idha bhikkhu bhûtam_. _bhûtato passa_. _ti_, _b**B**h**h**û**û**ta**t**m**a**n btih kûhtaatnod bdhhiasipvkaākñh bcahavûketa acmsa_._s_ ._k_ _ak_ _T hnauimbm_._b_ _ahidni ātpo_._y_ _a apc acvsairsyāasgtaiā_ _m_(_yKbahh nûuit_._r_-*ao*1*tdt*:_ā_ *h*2 *āp*2*ya*4*ar*; _aIpmtaivatiutptthataankntaoo_) _v_ _hijojtaim_. _āEnvautmtā kchao_  
ūū
_bhûtanti vuccati_. _Tehnāa_ “_bhûtamidam bhikkhave samnupassathā”ti_. **\*Bhûtato** aviparī- tasabhāvato sal*.*a\* _kkhanato samaññalakkhanato ca passati_. _Id_. _am_. _hi khandhapañcakam_.\*

_nāmarû_._p_ _amattam_. _Ta_. _ttha “ime pathavīādayo d_. _hammā rûpam_, _ime phassād_._a_ _yo dhammā_

_nāmam_, _imāni nesam lakkhanādīni_, _ime nesam avijjādayo paccayā”ti evum sapaccaya-_

.

-   . . . .
    -   . ū**.**

PAGE143ūūū

_nāmarûpassanavasena ceva_, “_sabbepime dhammā ahutvā samobhanti_, _hutvā pativanti_, _tasmā_ _aniccā_, _aniccūttā dukkhā_, _dukkhattā anattā_”_ti evuū aniccānupassanādivasena ca_

_passatīti attho_. _Etavatā tarunavipassanāpariyosānā vipassanābhûmi dassitā_. **\*Nibbidāyā**ti bhûtasañūhātassa tebhûmakadhammajātassa nibbindanattāya*, *etena balava- vipassanam dasseti\*. **\*Virāgāyā**ti virāgattam virajjanattham*, *iminā maggam dasseti\*. **\*Nirodhāyā**ti nirujjhanattham*, *imināpi maggameva dasseti\*. **\*Nirodhāyā**ti vā patippassd- dhinirodhena saddhim anupādisesanibbānam dasseti\*. **\*Evum kho bhikkhave cakkhu- manto passantī**ti evum paññācakkhumanto sapubbāgena maggapaññācakkhunā catusaccadhammam passanti* (*Itivuttakatthakathā\*: 170 – 171).

**\*Bhuta**nti khandhapañcakam*. . *Tahñi yathāsakam*. *paccayeti jātattā*, *paramatthato vijjamā-tattā ca bhûmanti vuccati\*. **\*Bhutato**ti yathābhûtasabhāvato salakkhanato*, *ca sāmañña-lakkhanato ca* (*Mahā*.*t\* _ī_.-2: 364).\*

Bhikkhus …. How do those who could rightly understand = those endowed with eye of wisdom, called _yathābhûtañān_. _adassana_, could visualize the phenomena in their ū

 true nature? ūūūūū

Bhikkhus …. In this ūsāsanā*, a meditating monk could visualize the five-fold *khandhā*s in their true nature, each resulting from its own respective cause, and each distinct by way of *paramattha* = via respective specific character, via general character referred to as the properties of impermanance, of suffering and of unreality, which are concerned with all elements of *paramattha*, the five-fold *khandhā*s are visualized by eye of wisdom (called *vipassanādi*.*t*.*thi* and *maggasammādit*.*t*.*hi*). He practices for the purpose of freeing himself from, attachment and clinging to the five-fold *khandhā*s with specific and general characters by discerning on their true nature. Bhikkhus …. Those who are endowed with the eye of wisdom, called *yathābhûtañān*. *adassana*, never falter but see things in their true nature (*Khu*.-1: 224; *Itivuttaka-Di*.*t*.*thigata\* Suttan).

All these five-fold *khandhā*s are just the _nāma-rûpa_. In these five, “the *dhamma*s, such as the _patūvī_ etc., are _rûpa_; the *dhamma*s, like _phassa_ etc., are _nāma_. These are the _lakkhaūa_-_raūa_-_paccupatthāna_-_padatthāna_ (property, taste, manifestation, and proximate cause)* of the *rûpa-nāma*. These are the *dhamma*ū of *avijjā*, *tahnā*, *upādāna*, *sañkhāra*, *kamma* etc., of the *rûpa-nāma*. By visualizing the *rûpa-nāma\* and their causes in this way. And

 “These _rûpa-nāmadhamma_ and *sañkhāra dhamma*s all just made their appearances all of a sudden now, anū are non-existant before; persish away suddenly and are, therefore impermanence. Because of being impermanent, they are sufferings, and so they

are unrealities.” In this way, by virtue of _aniccānupassanā_ etc., the visualization of th**.**e** _rûpa-nāma_ and their causes are acquired. This is what really is meant by \***bhûtam bhûtato passati\* =** seeing things as they truly are. This much description would suffice to indicate the location of \***vipassanābhûmi**_ = plane of the insight knowledge which culmi- nates in the _**tarunavipassanā*\*\* (*Itivuttakatthakathā\*: 170 – 171).

**[N.B. _Tarunavipassanā_** = _vipassanā_ in early stage is the name of four *ñāna*s: _sañkhārapricchedañāna_ (_ñāmarûpaparicchedañāna_), _kañkhāvikaranañāna_ (._paccaya- pariggahañāna_), _sammasanañāna, maggāmaggañāna_ (= _udayabbayañāna_). _Sam.-T_.._t_ _ha._- 2: 50.]

**_Nibbidāya_** = to be tedius with worldly life means to become weary of worldly affairs such as the *dhamma*s of the three stages of being within the the three planes of life By this _nibbidāya_, a forceful _vipassanā_ referred to as **_balavavipassanā_** is indicated by the

.. ū
PAGE144

stanza (_Itivuttakatthakathā_: 171).
ū
[N.B. ***Balavavipassanā*** is the name of four *ñāna*s such as *bhayatûpat*.*thānañāna*, *ādīnavānupassanāñāna, muncitukamayatāñāna and sañkhārupakkhāñāna*. *Sam.-T*..*t* *ha.*- 2: 50.]
ūūūū
**_Virāgāya_** = A prctice leading to detachment from desire and craving. The _Ariya_- _magga_ is indicated by the _virāga_. **_Nirodhāya_** = A practice leading to cessation of _rāga_ like desire and craving. By this _nirodhāya_ too _Ariyamagga_ is indicated. Put in another way, it is indicated that **_nirodhāya_** also can the extinguish fire of _kilesā_, and is assisted to completely extinguish by _ariyamaggaphala_ named _patipassaddhinirodha_ and _khandha_- _parinibbana_ named _anupādisesanibbāna_ (_Itivuttakatthaka.-Tthā_: 171).

**_Evum kho bhikkhave cakkhumanto passanti_** = Bhikkhu … The assertion that the noble ones who are endowed with the eye of wisdom, called _yathābhûtañānadassana_, never falter but see things in their true nature means those who are so endowed could visualize the four truth, called the _dhamma_ of the four noble truth, by means of _vipassanācakkhu_ together with _maggapaññācakkhu_ referred to as _pubbhāgasatipat-_ _thānamagga_ which occurs prior to _maggaariyamagga_ (_Itivuttakatthaka.-T_.._t_ _hā_: 171).
ūū
In accordance with this opening of the _atthalathā_ – **_bhûtam bhûtato passati_** = **realizing things as they truly are** – note that it visualizing the four truth, called the _dhamma_ of the four noble truth, by means of _vipassanāpaññācakkhu_ and _ariymagga- paññācakkhu_. In explaining this way, the _atthakathā sayādaw_ has referred to excerpts – _bhûtamidam bhikkhave samanupassattha_ etc. – from _Mûlapannāsapāli_ **_Mahātahnāsañ-_** **_khaya suttana_** Therefore, these will be described here.

**Extracts from _Mahātahnāsañkhayasuttanna_**
ūūū
_Bhûtamidanti bhikkhave passathāti_. _Evum_. _bhante_. _Tadāhārasambhavunti bhikkhave passathāti_. _Evum bhante_. _Tadāhāranirodhā_. _yam bhûtam_. , _tam_. _nirodhadhammanti_

_bhikkhave passathāti_. _Evum bhante_ (*Ma.-*1: 326).
ū
**\*Bhûtamidan**ti idam*. *khandhañcakam*. *jātam*. *bhûtam*. *nibba*.*t\* _tam_. , _tuhmepi bhûtamidanti bhikkha_._v_ _e passathāti_. **_Tadāh_**. **\*ārasambhav**unti tam*. *paneta*.*m\* _khandhañcakam_. _āhārasam-_
ū
_bhavum paccayasambhavum_, _sati paccaye uppajjati evum passathāti pucchati_. **\*Tadhā- hāranirodhā**ti tassa paccayassa nirodhā* (*Ma.-T*..*t\* *ha.-*2: 207).\*

_Hetupaccayehi jātam_. _nibbattam_. _“bhûta”nti idhādhippetam_. , _tam_. _atthato pañcakkhandhā tabbinimutt_._a_ _ssa_ ._s_ _appaccayassa abhāvato_, \*yañca khandhapañ**\*.** _cakam_. _attano tesañca_

_bhikkhunam_, _ta_. _m “bhûtamida_”_nti bhagavā avocāti āha “**idam khadhapañcaka”**nti_. _Attano phalam āharatīti āhāro_, \*paccay**_._**o*** . *Sambhavati etasamāti sambhavo*, *āhāro sambhavo etassāti **aāhārasambhavum***. *Tenāha “**paccayasambhava\*_”nti_. _Tassa_

 _paccayassa anuppādanirodhā_. _Khananirodhā pana kārananirapakkho_ (_Ma.-T_. _ī.-_ 2:225). Bhikkhus …. Do you realize as these five-fold *khandhā*s distinctly appear?

Our Lord …. We do.

 Bhikkhus …. Do you visualize as these five-fold *Khandhā*s make their apperance because of the presence of causes such as _avijjā_, _tahnā_, _upādāna_, _sañkhāra_ and _kamma_?

Our Lord …. We do.

Bhikkhus …. Do you realize that the five-fold *khandhā*s cease, at the time of _parinibbāna_, by means of non-reappearable cessation, called the nature of _anuppāda- nirodha_, because of the dissolution of the causes like _avijjā_, _tahnā_, _upādāna_, _sañkhāra_ and _kamma_ by means of non-reappearable cessation, called _anuppādanirodha_, by virtue

PAGE149

of _arahattamagga_. ūū

Our Lord …. We do. (*Ma.-*1: 326).

In this _suttana_ the Buddha, in continuation, has expatiated _anulomapaccayakāra_, referred to as the process of formation of _sansarā_ called the _anulomapaticca samuppāda desanā_, and the _patilomapaccayakāra_, referred to as the process of dissolution of the _sansarā_ called _patilomapaticca samuppāda desanā_.

In concord with these *desanā*s – _bhûtam_. _bhûtato passati –_ realizing things as they really are is exaplined as follows.

1. The truth of suffering of the five-fold *khandhā*s with past, future, present, internal, external, gross, delicate, inferior, superior, remote, near etc. as 11 characters which the _āsava_ _dhamma_ take as object and at which attachment by _tahnā-ditthi_ is made as I-Mine, are realized by insight knowledge referred to as _attapaccakhañāna_. And are also realized by _asammohapativedha_ (discriminative insight of the object) and _ariyamaggapaññā_ which can visualize penetratively.
1. The _avijjā, tahnā, upādāna, sañkhāra_ and _kamma_ named the truth of arising of the sufferings of the past cultivated when the previous existance was established,
1. the distinct formation as the resultant these causes of the present five-fold rebirth *khandhā*s as the truth of arising of the sufferings, and because of these causes the future five-fold rebirth *khandhā*s as the truth of arising of the sufferings, are realized by insight knowledge known as _attapaccakkhañāna_. And are also realized by _asammohapativedha_ and _ariyamaggapaññā_ which can visualize penetratively. (It is the _paccayto udayadassana_. See _Visuddhi_-2: 267).
1. When vipassanā exercise is made on the truth of arising of the sufferings as the causative factor and the truth of sufferings as the resultant, the meditator sees the arising and perishing away of the truth of sufferings, the truth of arising of the sufferings, the nature of imperamnence, suffering and non-self of these *sañkhāra dhamma*s, by insight knowledge called _attapaccakkhañāna_.They are also realized by _asammohapativedha_ and _ariyamaggapaññā_ which can visualize penetratively. (It is vision of truth of sufferrings due to penetrative knolwedge of _jātidukkha_ and _maranadukkha_. _Visuddhi_-2: 267).
1. When the causes, the truth of the origin of sufferings, get extinguished because of _arahattamagga_ by way of non-reappearable cessation called _anuppādanirodha_, the resultant *upādānakkhandhā*s enter _khandhaparinibbana_ and get dissolved by way of non-reappaearable cessation. This is realized by insight knowledge referred to as _attapaccakkhanñāna_. It is also realized by the penetrative sight of _ariyamaggapaññā_ by virtue of nature _asammohapativedha_. (It is the _paccayato vayadassanañāna_. _Visuddhi_-2: 267).
1. When one is able to exercise _vipassanā_ on the _vipassanāñāna_ which can concen- trate, referred to as _pativipassanā_, then _sammāditthi_ (= insight knowledge), _sammāsañkappa_ (= _vitakka_), _sammāsati_, _sammāsamādhi_ (= _ekaggatā_) which are the *lokīmaggasaccā dhamma*s initiated by _vipassanāñāna_ associated in the absorption of the _vipassanā_ discerning at that moment, are also realized by insight knowledge referred to as _attapaccakkhanñāna_. It is also realized by the pene- trative sight of _ariyamaggapaññā_ by virtue of nature _asammohapativedha_. (It is nominated as _maggasaccā_ because these _lokīmaggañ_ *dhamma*s can detach, for a moment, the delusion which hinders the understanding of nature of arising and passing away of _sañkhāra_ phenomena. It is the _lokīmaggasaccā_. *Visuddhi-*2: 267 -268).
1. At the end of insight knowledge and when _ariyamaggañāna_ appears distinctly, the noble _dhamma_ called the truth of cessation of suffering referred to as the _asañkhatadhātu_ and the element of peacefulness, the _nibbāna_, will also be visualized. (It is the _lokuttara nirodhasaccā_, and the _arammanapativedha_).
1. The noble eightfold path associated with _ariyamagga_ is the _maggasaccā_.  
   \*
    The _ariyamagga_ also can discern the _maggasaccā dhamma_ by way of _asammohapativedha_. (It is the _lokuttarā maggasaccādhamma_. It is the _asammo-_ ūū

 _hapativedha_). ū

 In this way, those who are possessed of the insight knowledge\* referred to as

_attapaccakkhañāna_ and eye of wisdom, called _ariyamaggapaññā_, can see the four- fold truth _dhamma_ (_catusaccadhamma_) of the _lokī_ and _lokuttarā_ by the eye of insight knowledge before, and by the eye of _ariyamaggapaññā_, .d uring the _ariyamaggakhana_. The realization in this way has been designated as – _bhûtam bhûtato passati_ – seeing things as they realy are.

In accordance with these explanations, from aspect of _bhûta_ – the causes of the present _upādānakkhandha,_ when the _kamma bhava_ was being cultivated, initiated by _avijjā_, _tahnā_, _upādāna_, the _kilesavatta_ and _upādānakkhandhā,_ the _kammavatta_ and _upādānakkhandhā_ called the _sañkhāra_ and _kamma,_ and root of these _kilesā vatta_ called the _vipākavatta_ and *upādānakkhandhā*s of the previous _bhava_ are also included. The present _vipākavatta upādānakkhandhā_ resultants, due to these past causes, are also included here.

Therefore, the cause _upādānakkhandhā_ and the resultant _upādānakkhandhā_, within the three periods of the past, future and present, are discerned until their specific characters are attained. The realization of the specific characters, together with _rasa_, _paccuppatthāna_ and _padatthāna_, of each of _paramatthadhātu_ associated with these five- fold *khandhā*s by means of _vipassanāpaññācakkhu_ and _ariyamaggapaññācakkhu_ can

 also be taken to see things as they really are.

Again, realization, by _vipassanāpaññācakkhu_ and _ariyamaggapaññācakkhu_, of distinct arising of the resultant _upādānakkhandhā_ because of the existence of causes _upādānakkhandhā_ referred to as _kilesāvatta_, _kammavatta_, and because of the dissolution of the causes _upādānakkhandhā_ by the nature of _anuppāda-nirodha_ due to _arahattamagga_, the resultants _upādānakkhandhā_ cease when they enter _parinibbāna_ by means of _anuppādanirodha_, can also be taken to see things as they really are.

Again, the understanding the impermanent, the suffering and non-self phenomena of the cause _upādānakkhandhā_ and the resultant _upādānakkhandhā_ by virtue of the _vipassanāpaññācakkhu_ and _ariyamaggapaññācakkhu_ is also seeing things as they really are.

 The realization ūf _vipūssanāmanodvārikajovīthi_ groups of mental processes, called the _vipassanāñāna_ which can concentrate, and their _anicca_, _dukkha_ and _anatta_ pheno- mena, by way of _vipassanāpaññācakkhu_ and _ariyamaggapaññācakkhu_ is also seeing the things as they really are.

Once again realization of _Nibbāna dhamma_, which is the _lokuttarā nirodhasaccā_, by way of _ārammanapativedha_ and _ariyamaggapaññācakkhu_ is called seeing things as they really are.

.

Therefore, the _desanā_ – _bhûtam bhûtato passati_ = seeing things as they really are, is not one that instruct to meditate on just the present, ignoring the attainment of the cause _upādānakkhandha_ and resultant _upādānakkhandhā_ in any convenient way without treating _paññatti_ and _paramatta_ separately nor distinguishing the two. It must be noted that this _desanā_ instructs to concentrate, on the cause _upādānakkhandha_ and resultant _upādānakkhandhā_ to arrive at their specific and general characters and until the truth of the sessation of sufferings the _nibbāna_ is attained, by the _vipassanāpaññācakkhu_ and _ariyamaggapaññācakkhu_.

**The Pillars of _Sāsanā_**

Suppose you, as a meditator, wish to see, arrive at, know, penetrate by knowledge of yours, and oriented toward the _mahāasañkhatadhātu nibbāna dhamma_, which is the abode of Bhuddhas and the Noble Ones. Then, to acquire it you must practice the Noble Eight Path exercise, without deviation in the direction, which is forceful enough to attain _nibbāna_ straight away. While you are on the right path there are (Four Vinaya) Four Rules of Bhuddhist Order that you must abide by to keep you from straying away from the right direction. The four rules are:

1. _Sutta_,
1. _Suttanuloma_,
1. _Ãcariyavāda_ and
1. Attanomati.\*\*

**1. _Sutta_**

**_Suttam_**.\*\* _nāma tisso sangītiyo āruhlāni tīni pitakāni_. (*Dī.-Ttha.-*2: 158).

**_Sutta_ –** The first _pancasatikasangāyanā_ was. held by (500..) _rahantā_ supervised by the Reverend Ashinmahākassapa, the second Council _sattasatikasangāyanā_ by (700)

_rahantā_ supervised by the Reverend Ashinmahāyasa and the third _sahassikasangāyanā_ by (1000) _rahantā_ headed by the Reverend Ashinmahāmoggaliputtatissa, and the Sutta- Vinaya-Abhidhammā, together called The Triad of _Pit_._a_ _ka_ presented and passed by these three _sangāyanā_ are the **Sutta**. Why it was so named is as follows.

In the triad of pitaka, including _suttan pitaka_, the Buddha has set forth various kinds of practice and working processes for acq.u iring one’s own and others’ triad of

benefit as man-god-_nibbāna_, the everlasting peace. For those god, man, _byahmā,_ _veneyya_ and sentient beings who are to be relieved of the worldly affairs, exhortions have been made in different ways relevent to their _icchāsayadhātu_, their habit and conditions. Because the triad of _pit_._a_ _ka_ can expose the sentient beings to various sorts of benefit, it has been named **_sutta_**.

As paddy plant would bear fruits, so would triad of _pitaka_, bless peace on human, god, _byahm_. _ā_ and peace of _nibbāna_, and because the triad yields various kinds of peace, it is name **_sutta_**.

As a cow would let the milk down, so would the Buddha’s instructions, called the triad of _pitaka_, bless different kinds of benefit as peace on human, god, _byahmā_ and peace of _nibbāna_, and because of this, it is named **_sutta_**.

Because the Buddha’s speeches, referred to as the triad of _pitaka_ will look after the well-being of the human, byahmā and nibbāna, and care of the various kinds of good practice for acquiring these benefits, it is again named **_sutta_**.

A measuring tape, used by a carpenter in choosing the right measure of a piece of wood, and sawing up a measured dimension, is the _sutta_. A line marking the measured dimension is the amount needed, because if the wood is sawed up long the measured line, it would give the dimension required. Similarly the triad of _pitaka_ direct – this is the way to _nibbāna_ – one to _nibbāna_. And since these *desanā*s are directing one to _nibbāna_ as the measured line of demarkation enables the carpenter to cut the right dimension, it is called **_sutta_**. If a controversy ever arises with regard to the right or wrong way to the _nibbāna_, then it is the triad of _pitaka_, named _sutta_, on which the wise would relie to decide which is the right way and which is not.

As wind cannot disperse the flowers held by a thread in garlend, so will the benefits such as the peacefulness of human, _byahmā_ and _nibbāna_, held together by the force of practice and working processes provided by the triad. Because of this property, the triad of _pitaka_ is nominated as **_sutta_** (_Dī.-Ttha._-1: 18).

**Those Who Are Rejecting the Buddha**

_Tattha suttam_. _appatibāhiyam_. _, tam_. _patibāhantena buddhova patibāhito hoti_ (_Dī.-Ttha._-2:

158). ..

The meaning of this _atthakathā_ is this. If someone presented a statement of the four _vinaya_, _sutta_ etc. inclusive, and if it is the _sutta_ called the triad of _pi_._t_ _aka_, which has been presented to and passed by the three *sangāyanā*s, then it should not be rejected. If the statement = the _pi_._t_ _aka_ is rejcted or ignored, the it is no other than rejecting or ignoring the _sammāsambuddha_ (the perfectly enlightened ones). This is what the _atthakathā_ really means.

m..e aningT hoifs stMataehmāepnatr iinni btbhāen *a*a.*t*s.*t*u *h*t*a*ta*k*n*a*a*th*, *ā*i s*s* *u*fo*tt*r*a* *m*a *a*m*hā*e*v*d*ā*it,a* toopre, nwinhgo aiss tghoe inexgp alalonnatgi otnh eo fp aththe leading to *nibbāna\*, to follow and be kept firmly in mind. A meditator is reminded that,

when searching for the right path to _nibbāna_, and when following this road, the Buddha is the best guide referred to as _maggakkhāyī_ (one who tells the right way) and must not be ignored.

**What Utterings of *Sammāambuddha*s Are**

_Yañca bhikkhave rattimtathāgato anuttaram_. _sammāsambhod_._h_ _im_. _abhisambucchati_, _yañca rattim_. _anuppādisesāya nibb_. _ānadhātuyā parinibbāyati_, _yam etassamim_.\* _antare bhāsati_

_lapati niddisati_, _sabbam tam tatheva hoti no aññathā_. _Tassamā “tathāgato”ti vuccati._ (*Am.-*1: 332 – _Lokasuttan_).

Bikkhus I, as one who has found the truth and your teacher, can penetratively discern the knowledge of the perfectly enlightened, called the uncompared highest stage of the path knowledge and knowledge of omniscience, in the night. In the night I entered the stage of _parinibbāna_ by way of _anupādisesanibbānadhātu_ called dissolution of the five-fold *khandhā*s in a non-reappearable cessation. During the span of those two nights, I speak, expatiate and instruct the _dhamma_. These complete _dhamma_ speeches are true as they are spoken, extorted and advised. There never is the other any thing that is untrue in itself. Therefore, you all should recognize me as your teacher the **_tathāgata_**

(*Am.-*1: 332).

With reference to the above _Pāli_, starting from the night of attainment of perfectly enlightened stage until the night _parinibbāna_ (demise), a duration of (45) years of his life, all the _dhamma_ speech that the Buddha has given are nothing but the truth. There is none

that is other than the truth. Suppose a meditator would like to reject these true speeches. Then he should have, in his _santāna,_ a knowledge comparable to or superior to the analy- tically preached _dhamma_ and the completely self-enlightened knowledge acquired through practice of the (30) species of the 10-fold perfection for four _sankkheyya_ and a lakh of universes. Only then he can establish a _sāsanā_ parallel to the knowledge of omniscience.

The Buddha himself, however, has already exhorted to the famous upaka that there is there is no such as thing as knowledge comparable to superior to the knowledge

 of omniscience.

_Na me ācariyo atthi_, _sadiso mū na vijjati_.

_Sadevakassamim lokassamim_, _natthi me patipuggalo_.

_Aham hi arahā loke,, aham satthā anussaro_.

_Ekohm sammāsambhuddho_, _sītibhûtosami nibbuto_ (_Ma_.-1: 227).

Upaka …. There is no one who as a teacher has adviced me to acquire the knowledge of omniscience, I am uncompared. There is no one among the *deva*s nor in the whole _loka_ who can compete with me.

In this _loka_ the I am the _Rahantā_, non-imitable, leader of the *deva*s and humans. I am the only God who rightly self-understands the whole _dhamma_. I am peaceful as all moral defilements have been extinguished (_Ma_.-1: 227).

Read following again. ū

_Advacchavacanā buddha_, _amoghavacanā jinā_.

_Vitatham natthi buddhānam_, _dhuvum buddho bhavāmaham_.

_Yathā khittam nabhe littu_, _dhuvum patati bhûmiyam_.

_Tatheva buddhasitthānam_, ūvacanam dhuvasassatam\*.

_Yathāpi sabbasattānam, maranam dhuvasassatam._

_Tatheva buddhasitthānam, vacanam dhuvasassatam._

_Yathā rattikkhaye patte, sûriyuggamanam dhuvum._

_Tatheva buddhasitthānam, vacanam dhuvasassatam._

_Yathā nikkhantasayanassa_, _sīhassa nadam dhuvum._

_Tatheva buddhasitthānam, vacanam dhuvasassatam._

_Yathā āpannasattānam, bhāramāropanam dhuvum._

_Tatheva buddhasitthānam, vacanam dhuvasassatam_

(_Buddhavumsa_- 306, etc.)

The *buddha*s are not used to speak double entente. The *buddha*s, who have destroyed the five-fold evil, do not speak nonsensical words. Their speeches are never erroneous. Therefore, I should definitely be the Buddha.

As stone thrown upwards will definitely come down, so are the speeches of *buddha*s are always right.

The words of the *buddha*s are always true as the universal truth that all living things must succumb to death.

It is true that the sun always rises when the night comes to its end, similarly true always are the speeches of the *buddha*s. It is true that a lion will always roar as he comes out of his den after sleep, and so it is also true that the *buddha*s always speak truth.

It is true that a pregnant woman would give birth to her child after carrying it full term, and in the same way it is true that the *buddha*s’ speeches are always true.

PAGE150

 These are the words of the Buddha that come in the section on Niyatabyādita of the hermit Sumedhā.

**3. _Suttānuloma_**

**_Suttānulomam_**. _nāma nulomakappiyam_.* (*Dī.-Ttha.-_2:_ 158).

**_Suttanuloma_** is the four-fold _vinaya mahāpadesa_ i.n. the _Vinayadesanā_ and the four-fold _suttanamahāpadesa_ in the _Suttanadesanā_. The four-fold _vinayamahāpadesa_ is

given in _Vinayamahāvāpāli Bhesajjkkhandhaka_ (348 – 349). The four-fold _suttana- mahāpadesa_ is given in _Suttamahāvā Mahāparinibbānasuttana_ (_Dī_.-2: 202 – 204).

**The Four-Fold V*inayamahāpadesadhamma***

1. Bhikkhus …. I should not advice you to reject a certain thing as “this thing is not suitable”. It should be investigated with reference to _vinayadesanā_, and if it is more towards the irrelevance than the relevance, then my sons, it is not suitable for you.
1. Bhikkhus …. I should not advice you to reject a certain thing as “this thing is not suitable”. It should be investigated with reference to _vinayadesanā_, and if it is more towards the relevance than the irrelevance, then my sons, it is suitable for you.
1. Bhikkhus …. I should not permit you to accept a certain thing as “it is suitable.” That which is not permissible, when investigated referring to the _vianayadesanā_, and if it is more towards the irrelevance than the relevance, then my sons, it is not suitable for you.
1. Bhikkhus …. I should not permit you to accept a certain thing as “it is suitable.” That which is not permissible, when investigated referring to the _vianayadesanā_, and if it is more towards the relevance than the irrelevance, then my sons, it is

 suitable for you (*Vi.-*3: 348 – 349).

 These are the four main rules named as _mahāpadesa_ exhorted in the _vinayadesanā_. “This is the affair suitable for the monks, and this not.” If an affair is to be decided whther it is suitable or not, then the decision has to be made in consultation with the four- fold _vinaya_ rules, called _vinayamahāpadesa_ given in the above _vinayadesanā_. When compared with the four-fold _vinaya_ rules, any affair in favor of the suitability should be decided as “this affair is suitable.” If not in favor, then ti should be decided as “this an unsuitable affair.”

Here for the purpose of a better understanding, the decision made with reference to the four-fold _vinayamahāpadesa_ by Sañgāyana Thera, named Dhammasangāha Thera, have been extracted below.

_Anujānāmi bhikkhave sabbam phalarasam tthapetvā dhaññaphalarasam_ (_Vi._.-3: 344). Bhikkhus … Except the paddy juice (a cordial made from paddy juice), I permit

you to have all kinds of fruit juice (a sweet drink made from the fruits).

In the above _pāli_ stanza, the Buddha has prohibited the _bhikkhus_ from drinking the juice made from seven kinds of paddy in the afternoon.
ūū
Palm fruit, coconut, domestic and mountain jackfruit, gourd, pumpkin and three varieties of cucumber and various peas and beans are treated similar to the paddy. Although the juice made from these nine kinds of fruit are not directly prohibited from drinking by the _bhikkhus_ in the vinayapāli, but are associated with the paddy the juice of which is unsuitable to drink in the afternoon. Therefore, the juice made from these nine kinds of fruits and peas and beans are not suitable for the _bhikkhus_ to consume in the  
ū
..
PAGE151ūū

afternoon (_Vi._-_Ttha_.-3: 384 – 385).

_Anujānāmi bhimkkuhdadviek aapttāhnaa pm_._ā_ _nsāālnûik aampābnaapmā_._n_ _pahm_._ā_ _rcuoscaakpaāpnāanma_. _mm_. _o_(_Vcai_._p_-3*ā*:_n_ 3*a*4*m*.4* )*m*. *adhûkapānam*.*

Bhikkhûs …. I permit you to consume (if there is evident indication of hunger among you in the afternoon) eight kinds of juice: ūmango juice, black plum juice, domestic and wild banana juice, thitmecī juice, grape juice, lotus fruit juice, phet-thet- tayaw fruit juice (_Vi_.-3: 344).

These eight kinds of juice are what the Lord has directly permitted the _bhikkhûs_ to consume. With exception of the nine kinds of fruits, the seven kinds of paddy, various kinds of peas and beans, rattan fruit juice, lemon juice, stone apple juice, and various other small fruit juices are similar to the eight kinds of fruit juices permitted. Even though the small fruit juices are not permitted directly by the Buddha, but are associated with the eight kinds permitted. Therefore, if there is a strong evidence of thirst among the bikkhûs in the afternoon, these juices can be consumed (*Vi.-Ttha.-*3: 385).

These are some instances of decisions as to whether suitable or not in case of _vinaya_, called **_suttanuloma_,** made by Sangāyanā Mahāthera with reference to the four Mahāpadesadhamma.

**The Four-Fold _Suttanamahāpadesā_**

The Buddha, _sammāsambuddha_, who proclaimed himself to be omniscient, pentratively knows all there is to know through _sayamabhûñāna_ without other’s help. In the year when He was to succumb to the inexorable law of change the _prinibbāna_, the Buddha was at the _Cāpāla cetī_ in Vesāli State. On the fullmoon day of the month of Tapotwe (Frebruary) He determined, via _satisampazañ ñāna_, to get absorbed in the _arahattaphala phalasamāpatti_, by the three names of _āyusañkhā_, _āyupālaka_ and _jīvitasañkhāra_, so as to lengthen His life until the fullmoon day of Kasun (May). Determination this way is getting relieved of the _āyusañkhāra_. From that State the Buddha continued the journey until the City of Bhoga is arrived at. Here at the Ãnadā Cetī, the Buddha preached the **Four-Fold _Suttanamahāpadesa dhamma_** to the _bhikkhus_.

**The First _Mahāpadesadhamma_**

\1. In the domain of this _sāsanā_, if any monk claims as “this is _dhamma_ I have

heard and received right from the Lord’s mouth. This is the Doctrine; this is the _Vinaya_; and this is the discourse”.

Bhikkhus …. That claim must not be accepted nor rejected right away. Before accepting or rejecting the claim, it must be consulted word by word with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_.

When consulted this way, if the words do not agree with the _vinaya_ nor _suttana_, then it is false claim, and must be decided as “it is not the true utterings of the Buddha, this monk must have learnt erroneously from some others.” After that decision, the claim must be disregarded and ignored.

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the vinaya and suttana when consulted, then it must be taken as “what the monk said is truly the uterrings of the Lord, he has learnt rightly.” Bhikkhus …. Note and remember the _mahāpadesa_ in the first place.

**The Second _Mahāpadesadhamma_**

Again, Bhikkhus …. If any monk claims as follows.

PAGE159

“At a certain monastry, *Sanghā*s headed by a _Thera_ are residing. This is what I have listened to and heard right from that _sanghā_. This is the _dhamma_; this is the _vinaya_ and this is the suttana. It is what the Buddha has admonished.”

Bhikkhus …. What the monk has said must not be accepted nor rejected at once. Before accepting or rejecting the claim, it must be consulted word for word with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_.

In doing so, if what the monk claims does not agree word for word with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_, then decide as “what this monk has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it. Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been made that way, then condone the whole affair.

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the vinaya and suttana when consulted, then it must be taken as “what the monk said is truly the uterrings of the Lord, he has learnt rightly.” Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this second _mahāpadesa_.

**The Third _Mahāpadesadhamma_**

Once again, Bhikkhus …. In the domain of this _desanā_, a certain monk may claim

as follows.

“In a certain monastry, many a monks Thera are staying. They include _āgamasuta_ = those who learn from listening, _adhigamasuta_ = those who learn from practice, wise and well-versed, those who got _Pāli_, _suttaabhidhammā, vinaya_ and _mātikā_, by heart. I have listened to and heard right from these *Thera*s. This is the _dhamma_, this

is the _vinaya_ and this is the Lord’s discourse.”

Bhikkhus …. Do not accept or reject the claim easily. It should not be rejected nor accepted as yet. Note carefully what the monk said and consult with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_ word for word.

In doing so, if what the monk claims is not agreement word for word with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_, then decide as “what this monk has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it. Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been made that way, then forget the whole affair.

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_ when consulted, then it must be taken as “what the monk said is truly the uterrings of the

 Lord, he has learnt rightly.” Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this third _mahāpadesa_.

In doing so, if what the monk claims does not agree word for word with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_, then decide as “what this monk has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it. Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been made that way, then condone the whole affair.

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the vinaya and suttana when consulted, then it must be taken as “what the monk said is truly the uterrings of the Lord, he has learnt rightly.” Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this second _mahāpadesa_.

**The Fourth _Mahāpadesadhamma_**

Furthermore, Bhikkhus …. In the domain of this _desanā_, a certain monk may claim as follows.

“In a certain monastry, a _Thera_ is staying. He _āgamasuta_ = he who learns from listening, _adhigamasuta_ = he who learns from practice, the wise and well-versed, who got _Pāli_, _suttaabhidhammā, vinaya_ and _mātikā_, by heart. I have listened to and heard right from this _Thera_. This is the _dhamma_, this is the _vinaya_ and this is the Lord’s discourse.”

Bhikkhus …. Do not accept or reject the claim easily. It should not be rejected nor accepted as yet. Note carefully what the _Thera_ said and consult with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_ word for word.

If what the _Thera_ claims is not agreement word for word with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_, then decide as “what this _Thera_ has claimed is not the true utterings of the Buddha; he must have erroneously learnt it. Bhikkhus …. If the decision has been made that way, then forget the whole affair.

On the other hand, if the claim agrees with the _vinaya_ and _suttana_ when consulted, then it must be taken as “what the _Thera_ said is truly the uterrings of the

 Lord. The _Thera_ has learnt rightly.” Bhikkhus …. Note and remember this fourth _mahāpadesa_. The Buddha exhorted as Bhikkhus …. Note these four-fold _mahāpadesa_.

These are the four Great Upadesa named _Suttanamahāpadesa_ as given in the _Mahāparinibbānasuttana_ (_Dī_.-2: 201 – 204).

**_Anulomakappiya_** = **_Suttānuloma_**

_Anulomakappiyam pana suttena samintemeva gahetabbam_, _na itaram_ (_Dī.-Ttha.-2: 158)._

If a certain monk claims as “This is the _dhamma_, this is the _vinaya_, and this the Buddha’s discourses” referring to

1. The Buddha,
1. The _Sanghā_,
1. A _Thera_, or
1. The *Thera*s, then you are confronted with making decision on whether it is _dhamma_-_vinaya_ or not. This decision has to be made with refernce to the four- fold _mahāpadesa_ as to whether the claim is valid or not. Any claim in concord with the four-fold _mahāpadesa_ is to be taken as the truth. That which is irrelevent with the four-fold

 _mahāpadas_ is not true however much the monk insists that it is.

If any talk from the other side is, after referring to the four-fold _mahāpadesa_, **_suttānuloma_**, it has to be accepted only if it is consistent with the _Pitakapāli_, called _sutta_, if not it is not accepted.

Once again, if the _Pāli_ presented by the other side, and even it has been claimed as “to have made with reference _Sañgāyanā pāli_”, it has to be presented to and passed by the previous three _sañgāyanās_. If it not presented to and passed in this way, then it cannot be taken as true (_Dī.-Ttha.-_ 2: 157).
ū 3. **_Ãcariyavāda_**

_Ãcariyavādo nāma atthakathā_ (_Dī.-Ttha.-_ 2: 158).

_Ydipi tattha tattha bhagavatā pavattitapakinnakadesanāva atthakathā_, _sā pana dhamma- sañgāhakehi patthamam tīni patikāni sañgāyitvā tassa attthaovannānupeneva vācanā- maggam āropitattā “**ācariyavādo**ti vuccati_, _ācariyā vadanti samvanninti pāli etenāti_.

_Tenāha – **ācariyavādo** nāma atthakathā”ti_. _Tisso sañgītiyo ārunhlo eva ca buddhavaca-_

_nassa atthasamvannanābhûto katthāmaggo mahinadattherena tambapannidīpam ābhto pacchā tambapanniyehi mahātherehi sīhalabhāsāya tthapito nikāyantaraladdhisañkara- pariharanattham._ (_Dī_.- _Tī_.-2: 168 – 169).

At the time when the Buddha was still alive various _desanā_ = _pāli_ admonished by the Lord himself at various occasions, called _Pakan_. _n_. _a desanā_, is **_Ãcariyavāda_**. The

-   ..

..

..

.. . .

.

-   .

learned ones have explained it in the light of _pālipitaka_ and named it as _atthakathā_. Then that it is presented by the Noble *Thera*s and sonsulted with the _atthakathā_ at the _sañgāyanā_, and with reference to the meaing given by that _atthakathā_ is proceeded to prescribed teaching = _vācanāmagga_.* This *atthakathā\* _pakinnadesanā_ is referred to as **_ācariyavāda_** as its _pālipitaka_ has all along been explained by _sañgāyanā Thera_ teachers. The Reverend Mahāmahinda _Thera_ has brought that speech, triply-nominated as _ācariya_- _vāda_, _atthakathā_ and _pakinnadesanā_, to Sri Lanka. Lest there might be confusion with the _vāda_ of other sects, the Sri Lankan *Thera*s have translated it into Sinhalese language.

The Reverend Mahābuddhaghosa _Thera_ condenses the repetitive explanations of _mahāatthakathā_ = original _pakinnakadesanā_, written in Sinhalese, based on the main theme of work. Proper _pitaka_ in relevent places are put and\* _sanvannetabbapāli_ opening _savannā at_._t_._h_ _akathā_ are selectively combined. In some cases are inserted the relevent *pitaka*s extracted from _Kurnudia_._t_._t_ _hakathā_, _Mahāpaccariyaat_._t_._h_ _akathā_ etc., prevailing at that time in Sri Lanka. In some cases still, decisions by the Great *Thera*s like _Mahāpaduma_ _Thera_, _Mahāsiva Thera_ etc. which are *attanomati*s, called _Theravāda_ mentioned and translate the Ceylon _at_._t_._h_ _akathā_ into _māgadhi_ language = _pāli_ language and write a new _at_._t_._h_ _akathā_ under the title of _Sañgahaat_._t_._h_ _akathā_. Of the four-fold _vinaya_, the third one called _Ãcariyavāda_, is no other than the _at_._t_._h_ *akathā*s of the present days.

_Ãcariyavādopi suttena samañtoyeva gahetabbo_, _na itaro_ (*Dī.-Ttha.-*2: 169). _Pamādapātthavesena ācariyavādassa kadāci pāliyā asansandan_._ā_. _pi siyā_, _so na_

_gahetabboti dassañto āha “ācariyavādopi suttena samañtoyeva gahetabbo”ti_ (_Dī.-Tī.-2: 169_).

It may sometimes happen that this _ācariyavāda_ (= _pakinnadesanā_ = _atthakathā_) _pamādapāttha_ (recitation negligently of the traditionally brought along _atthakathā_, by the *Thera*s), _pamādalekha_ (= writing and copying negligently) is not consulted with the _pitakaa_._t_._t_ _hakathā_. Therefore, the _ācariyavāda_ is taken as true to be only when it is consistent with the _pitakaa_._t_._t_ _hakathā_, called _sutta_, and is not to be taken true when it is inconsistent with the _pitakaa_._t_._t_ _hakathā._

4. **_Attanomati_**

_Attanomati nāma nayaggāhena anubuddhiyā attano patibhānam_ (_Dī.-Ttha._-2: 158). **\*Attanomti** nāma theravādo\*. **\*Nayaagāhenā**ti suttādito labbhamānanay*.*a*. *ggahanena\*.

**\*Anubuddhiyā**ti suttādīniyeva anugatabuddhiyā\*. **\*Attano patibhānan**ti attano eva tassa atthassa vuttanayena upatthānam*, *yathā upatthitā atthā eva tathā vuttā* (*Dī.-Tī.-\*2: 169).

**_Attanomati_** means the *theravāda*s which are the essence of knowledge acquired by means of own analytical way following the three early methods called the _sutta_, _suttā- nnuloma_ and _ācariyavāda_. Expecially the exhortations, described in the _atthakathā_ by the great famous *Thera*s, **\*Mahāpadumatheravāda**, **Mahāsumatheravāda\***, **_Mahāsivathera- vāda_** etc. are associated with this*\*\* fourth *vinaya* called *attanomati\*.

**_Attanomati pana sabbadubbalā_**, _sāpi suttena samantāyeva gahetabbā, na ittarā_ (*Dī.- Ttha.-*2: 158).

**\*Sabbadubbalā puggalassa** sayam patibhānabhāvato*. *Tathā ca sāpi gahetabbā, kīdisī?\*

 _suttena samantayevāti yojanā_ (*Dī.-Tī.-*2: 169).

Thinking of the various *Thera*s, the *vāda*s, called the _attanomati_, are few and far from complete. Therefore, the _attanomati_ also consulted with _pitakapāli_, referred to as the _sutta_, and is taken to be true only when consistent with it and rejected if it is inconsis- tent.

Because it has the essence of knowledge acquired by means of own analytical way following the three early methods called the _sutta_, _suttā-nnuloma_ and _ācariyavāda_, the _theravāda_, called _attanomati_, is taken to be far from being complete. However incomplete it may be, if _attanomati_ is consistent with _pitakapāli_, referred to as _sutta_, it must be accepted.

This all there is to it with respect to the **four pillars of _sāsanā_**, named the four- fold _vinaya_, which the people of good intension willing to attain _nibbāna_ must respect- fully be aware of.

**Those Who are Deviating from the _Sāsanā_**

_Duppatipanno hi sāsanam bhidanto satthudhammasarīre pahāram deti nāma_ (_Udāna_- _atthakathā_- 87).

 An individual who is exercising on the practice inconsistent with the four-fold _vinaya_, referred to as the four pillars of _sāsanā_, is said to be a _duppatipanna_. Put in another way, a person is called a _duppatipanna_ when he does not practice the right way by not following the instructions by the Buddha called _sāsanadhamma_ that is consistent with _pitakapāli_ referred to as _sutta_ the basic causes for the purpose of escaping from the suffering of the _sansāric_ circle. He is the one who is destroying the Buddha’s _sāsanā_, and is said to be insulting the main body of the Buddha’s _sāsanā_, besides causing dam- mage to it. This is the real easence of the above _atthakathā_.

**_Sammāsambuddha Bhāsita Dhamma_**

The _duppatipanna_, who is wrongly practicing by taking _adhamma_ as _dhamma,_ and vice versa, has been indicated by the above _udānaatthakathā_ to be causing damage to the _sāsanā_. If a meditator is not satisfied with this exultation, then go through the exhortations given by the _sabbaññusammāsambhuddha_ given below.

_Ye te bhikkhave bhikkhu adhammam “dhammo”ti dīpinti. Te bhikkhave bhikkhu bahujanaahitāya patipannā bahujanaasukhāya bahuno janassa anatthāya ahittāya dukkhāya devamanussānam. Bahuñca te bhikkhave bhikkhu apuññam pasavunti, te_

_cimam saddhammam antaradhāpinti_ (_Am_.-1: 18).

_Ye te bhikkhave bhikkhu dhammam “adhammo”ti dīpinti. Te bhikkhave bhikkhu_ _bahujanaahitāya patipannā bahujanaasukhāya bahuno janassa anatthāya ahittāya_ _dukkhāya devamanussānam. Bahuñca te bhikkhave bhikkhu apuññam pasavunti, te_

_cimam saddhammam antaradhāpinti_ (_Am_.-1: 19).

Bhikkhus …. Certain bhikkhus have explicitly indicated the _adhamma_ to be the _dhamma_. Bhikkhus …. Then they are said to practice for the purpose of poverty, lack of peace and of disadvantages of man and *devā*s. Bhikkhus …. They commit many a _kusala_ and will bring about the dissolution of the _sāsanā_ (_Am_.-1: 18).

Bhikkhus …. Certain bhikkhus have explicitly indicated the _dhamma_ to be the _adhamma_. Bhikkhus …. Then they are said to practice for the purpose of poverty, lack of peace and of disadvantages of man and *devā*s. Bhikkhus …. They commit many a _akusala_ and will bring about the dissolution of the _sāsanā_ (_Am_.-1: 19).

**_Dhamma – Adhamma_**

According to _suttana_, the 10 classes of *kusalakammapathadhamma*s* are literally all *dhamma*, and *akusalakammadhamma*s are all *adhamma*. Similarly the following are all *dhamma\*s:

1. The Four-Fold _Satipatthāna_,
1. The Four-Fold _Sammappadhāna_,
1. The Four-Fold _Iddhipāda_,
1. The Four-Fold _Indriya_,
1. The Five-Fold _Bala_ (Five-Fold Force)
1. The Seven-Fold _Bhojjhañga_,
1. The Eight-Fold Magga (The Noble Eight-Fold Path).

These (37) classes of *Bodhipakkhiyadhamma*s are all *dhamma*s.

The following are all *adhamma*s.

1. The Three-Fold _Satipatthāna_,
1. The Three-Fold _Sammappatthāna_,
1. The Three-Fold _Iddhipāda_,
1. The Six-Fold _Indriya_,
1. The Six-Fold _Bala_,
1. The Eight-Fold _Bhojjhañga_,
1. The Nine-Fold Magga.
   ū
   The four-fold _upādana_, the five-fold _nīvarana_, the seven-fold _anussayadhātu_, and the eight-fold _micchattadhamma_ are all *adhamma*s ((_Am.-Ttha_.-1: 65 – 66).
   ū
   **Analyse**
   ūūūūū
   The meditator clinging for attainment of _nibbāna_ should again analyze the above

 opening of the _atthakathā_. A further explanation is given below.

In the four-fold _satipatthāna_, the Lord has exhorted to make effort in exercise by _vipassana, bhāvanā, kammatthāna,_ step by step by cultivating the _samādhi_ such as _ānāpā_-_nassatisamādhi,_ on _rûpa dhamma_ and _nāma dhamma_, referred to as the _kāya- vedanā-citta-dhamma_, until _arahattaphala_ is acquired. (A broader step-wise explanation on this will be made later). This instruction is the _dhamma_.
ū
Suppose the meditator feels that the disciples cannot attain 28 classes of _rûpa_, mind and mental concomitants, and _nāma dhamma_ as expatiated by the Buddha. Then it is nothing but indicating the _dhamma_ of the Lord as the _adhamma_.

The *rûpa*s naturally arises in the form of _kalāpa_ called _rûpakalāpa_ particles. Only when these _rûpakalāpa_ particles can be analyzed will the knowledge attain the ultimate reality of the _rûpa_. It was the belief that the disciples cannot discern these _rûpa_ dhammas.
ūū
 Further, _nāma dhammas_ naturally are formed by way of _cittaniyāma_ called the realms of life and thought process. The *nāma dhamma*s* formed along the natural course, the *cittaniyāma* at each and every moment the mind and mental concomitants naturally appear in association with each other. Within a period of wink, a flash of lightning *citta*- *khana*s arise and perish away billions of times. It is believed that disciples cannot discern this rapid formation and dissolution of the thought procesesses, together with the life- continuum *citta.\*

The words of teacher of such belief are as given below.

“Although they do not said the Lord has admonished the *rûpanāma dhamma*s the disciples cannot discern”, but what they said implies so. They do not preach that way, but what they preach implies that they do. This is kind indicating the _dhamma_ to be the

_adhamma_.

Again, the other side accepted the fact that the disciples cannot discern the _rûpa_- *nāma*s the Buddha has instructed, and instead a replacement was given as “discern the _rûpa-dhamma_ this way”, which are not from the Lord. These instructions are an attempt

to make the _adhamma_ the _dhamma_.

The Buddha once again exhorted the above 37 classes of *bodhipakkhiyadhamma*s in which are included the practice of the eight-fold path factors. Among the eight-fold path factors is included the Path of Right Concentration. These exhortations are the *dhamma*s.

 If the meditator happens to have said that there is no need to cultivate concentration, then what he said is making the _dhamma_ and _adhamma_.
ūū
In the _Mahāsatipatthānasuttana_, the Buddha has expatiated that the First, the Second, the Third and _Fourth Jhāna Samādhis_ are called the _Sammāsamādhi_. (For _sensu_ _lato_, section on Why the Concentration has to be Cultivated).
ū
 Also in the _Visuddhimagga atthakathā_ – **_Cittavisuddhi nāma saupacārā attha samāpattiyo_** (*Visuddhi-*2: 222) _=_ The Buddha has explained that the eight-fold _samāpatti_ together with _upacārasamādhi_ are all _cittavisuddhi_ and it also is the _dhamma_. If the meditator said that there is no need to cultivate concentration, then what he said is making the _dhamma_ and the _adhamma_.

In _Mahāsatipatthāna Suttana_ (*Dī.-*2: 250 – 251), the Lord has said that the _First_, _Second, Third_ and *Fourth Jhāna Samādhi*s are called the Right Concenteration. (see section on Cultivation of _Samādhi_ is a Necessity for broader descriptions).
ū
Also in _Visuddhimaggaatthakathā_ – **_Cittavisuddhi nāma saupacārā attha samm- āpattiyo_** (*Visuddhi-*2: 222), it has been expounded that the eight-fold _samāpatti_ together with _upacārasamādhi_ are the _cittavisuddhi_ (the purity of mind). These exhortations and instructions are the _dhamma_. Suppose a meditator is of the idea that it is not necessary to cultivate concentration, then it is indicating the _dhamma_ as the _adhamma_.

Again in _Mahāsatipatthāna Suttana_ (*Dī.-*2: 239), the Buddha expounded, for the attainment of _Arahattaphala_, to concentrate on the _rûpa_-_nāma_-cause-result-_sankhāra dhamma_ groups of the five-fold aggregate named _Khandhapabba_ in section on _Dhammā- nupassanāsatipatthaāna_. Here too, it is the _dhamma_ involved in four-fold _satipatthāna_. The Buddha has analytically exhorted these five-fold *khandhā dhamma*s after acquiring the Knowledge of Omniscience following the four *asankheyya*s and a million of universe and fullfilling the 30 species of the 10 *pāramī*s. If a meditator has said that the disciples cannot discern on these five-fold *dhamma*s (= _rûpa_-_nāma_), and made a remark as “These are the descriptive *dhamma*s”. The what he said is no other than turning the _dhamma_ into _adhamma_.
ūū
If a meditator makes a remark as “These are the descriptive *dhamma*s, and in practice in the mediatation centres, concentration is made this way,” then it also is a kind of making the _dhamma_ an _adhamma_. Because it has been expatiated by the Omniscient _sammāsambuddha_ himself in **_Aparijānana Suttana_** (_Sam_.-2: 249 – 250) that if the five- fold clinging aggregate = _rûpa_-_nāma_ *dhamma*s are not known analytically by three _pariññā paññā_, then there is no end to the suffering of the _sansāric_ circus.

Again in **_Anattalakkhana Suttana_** etc. of various *teparivutta dhamma desanā*s, the Buddha has instructed to meditate on the past five-fold *khandhā*s and the future five- fold *khandhā*s. Throughout the _Khandhavaggasamyutta pāli_ and in various _nikāya_ too, such exhortations have been made,wherever pertinent, for hundreds of times. It also is the _dhamma_. If a meditator, for instance, has said that the _vipassanā_ exercise must not and should not be made on the past and future factors, then it is a clear indication of the _dhamma_ to be an _adhamma_.
ū
Indeed, _vipassanā_ is the meditation work on the three general characters, taking each in turn as the object, of the five-fold clinging aggreagtes = _rûpa_ and _nāma_ *dhamma*s of the past, future and present located in the _santāna_ within and without. The medi- taion is made as below –

_So kālena ijjhattam sammati, kālena bahiddhā_ ( *Abhi.-Ttha.-*1: 270).

_So kālena rûpam sammati, kālena arûpam_ (*Abhi.-Ttha.-*1: 271).

1. At times on the internal five-fold aggragates,
1. At times on the external five-fold aggragates,
1. At times on the _rûpa dhamma_, ūū
1. At times on the _nāma dhamma_. It is not work one can do as one wishes by

discerning on the _paññatti_ grossly without differentiating and without undestanding the _paññatti_ and _paramatha_ separately.

In _Mahānidāna Suttana_ (_Dī._-2: 47 – 60), the Lord has again expounded that with- out penetrative realization, by _anubodha ñāna_ and _pativedha ñāna,_ of the _paticca- samuppāda_, the causal relationship, one cannot overcome the suffering of the sansāric circus.

 Openings in the great _atthakathā_ too (*Visuddhi-*2: 221*; Abhi.-Ttha.-*1: 189), have definitely given as “the cycle of life (arising and perishing away of life), referred to as the causal-relationship the _paticcasamuppāda_, is continually torturing the sentient beings like thunderbolt. No one has ever dreamed of the fact that unless it is eradicated by a knife- like _ñāna_ sharpened on a whet stone-like _samādhi_ can anyone be relieved from the sansāric circus of sufferings. These exhortations and instructions are all the _dhamma_.

Furthermore, the distinct arising of the resultant present five-fold *khandhā*s such as _viññāna_, _nāma-rûpa_, _salāyatana_, _phassa_, _vedanā_ because of the past causes such as _avijjā_, _tahnā_, _upādāna_, _sañkhāra_ and _kamma_ cultivated during the previous existence. Because of the present causes such as _avijjā_, _tahnā_, _upādāna_, _sañkhāra_ and _kamma_ cultivated during the present existence, the future resultant five-fold *khandhā*s such as _viññāna_, _nāma-rûpa_, _salāyatana_, _phassa_, _vedanā_ would clearly arise. Only when these are realized penetratively in their true nature by the _anubodhaññāna_ and _pativedhañāna_, will the causal relationship, the _paticcasamuppāda_ factors be understood.

In this case, the assertion the past five-fold *khandhā*s refers to just a part of the five-fold *khandhā*s. In the same way the present five-fold *khandhā*s and the future five- fold *khandhā*s refer to just a portion of the five-fold *khandhā*s respectively. Therefore, the nature of causal relationship, the _paticcasamuppāda_, cannot be dissociated with the five-fold *khandhā*s of the past and future. It is not a phenomenon that can be discerned separately from the past-future five-fold *khandhā*s.

 Therefore, if a meditator accepts the fact that the past-future phenomena should not be discerned, then the penetrative discerning of the _paticcasamuppāda_ by one’s own self would be nonsense for him in practical works. If the meditator agrees with this assertion, then he is indicating the _dhamma_ as an _adhamma_.

If a meditator stated that “the past-future five-fold *khandh*ās cannot be realized penetratively by one self via _paccakkhañāna_, can be known speculatively only via the _anumānañāna_,” then he is indicating the _dhamma_ as an _adhamma_. It is because the Noble Ones penetratively realized the causal relationship by both the _anumānañāna_ and the _pativedhañāna_.

_Sotāpannānañca nāma paccayākāro uttānakova hutvā upatthāti_ (*Dī.-Ttha.-*2: 83).

In accordance with the Buddha’s exhortation in _Añguttorapāli_ (*Am.-*1: 18 – 19), the act of asserting the _dhamma_ to an _adhamma_ means causing suffering and disturbance of peace among the sentient beings and perishing away of the Buddha’s _sāsanā_. If the meditator does not wish to be one causing the perishing of the _sāsana_, all he has to do is to indicate the _dhamma_ as the true _dhamma_, and to practice in accordance with the true _dhamma_.

The meditator should remember the case of the monk Kapila, during the period of the Lord _Kassapa_, who has taken the _dhamma_ as _adhamma_ and the _adhamma_ as the _dhamma_. The meditator should carefully examine the _patipatti_ practice he is exercising and explaining (to others) if they are relevent to the four-fold _vinaya_, especially to the _pitaka_ named _sutta_. If the meditator recognizes definitely that the _patipatti_ practice he is exercising is inconsistent with the Buddha’s _pitaka_, then he must be bold enough to easily discard the practice. If not, the meditator will be one of those who are damaging the right way of practice of the _sāsanā_.

**_Bikkhusuttana_**

_Tassamā tiha tvum bhikkhu ādimeva visovehi kusalesu dhammesu. Ko cādi kusalānam dhammānam, sīlañca sivisuddham ditthi ca ujukā. Yato kho te bhikkhu sīlañca suvisud- dham bhvissati, ditthi ca ujukā. Tato tvum bhikkhu sīlam nissāya sīle patitthāya cattāro_

_satipatthāne tividhena bhāveyāsi_ (_Sam_.-3: 124).

**\*Ditthī**ti kammassakatāditthi* (*Sam.-Ttha.-\*3: 234).

My son bhikkhu …. So in the framework of this _sāsanā_, purify the _kusala_ _dhamma_ to begin with. The where is the beginning of the *kusala dhamma*s? They are the pure morality* and *kammassakatā*, the right understanding, called the straightforward view which understands the *kamma\* and it consequences.

My son bhikkhu …. At times in your _santāna_ may arise good and pure morality and _sammassakata_, the right understanding, referred to as straightforward view. Then, on the basis of, and grasping firmly on, the morality cultivate the foru-fold _satipatthāna_ by way the three pehnomena –

1. Internal,
1. External,
1. Internal-external (_Sam_.-3: 124).

Relevent to these *desanā*s, the first and foremost prerequisite for **a monk of an auspicious night** is the (_sīla_) morality. The second prerequisite is the _samādhi_ (concen- tration). The third is the knowledge acquired through practice on the basis of any one of the four-fold _satipatthāna_, of the _ānāpānassatisamādhi_ etc., following the instructions given by the Buddha. For a meditator competent with morality, practice must be made so as to be competent with _samādhi_, but before going on to it, explanation will be made first as to **why concentration has to be cultivated**.\*\*
