NIBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBB**Ā**NA** 

**SECTION OF SANKH**Ā**RUPEKKH**Ā **Ñ**ĀŅ**A** 

**VOLUME V Page 349 - 385** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN Ñ**ĀŅ***AGAVESAKA)*** 

***"namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhddhassa"*** **PAGE-349** 

**7.  Section  of  *Saṅkhāarupekkhāañ***āṇ***a*  (The  knowledge  of  Neutrality Towards Formations)** 

1. ***Dvikotikā*** ***suññatānupassanā*** 

After discerning by the knowledge of Reflection on conditioned things in a way that ***sabbe saṅkhārā*** ***suñña*** = all kinds of conditioned things are void of 'self', then the nature of nothingness with two situations ***(dvikotika suññata)*** is kept in mind by reason ***(pañña)***... that ... "***suññamidam attena vā*** ***attaniyena vā*** = all these conditioned things are void of both "self" and "prosperity" related with self. ***(Vs-2-291)*** 

Although  the  knowledge  of  Reflection  occurs  through  keeping  in  mind  on  the phenomena  of ***anicca,  dukkha,  anatta***  of  conditioned  things,  especially  \_\_\_\_  keeping  in mind on the phenomenon of ***anatta*** plays significant role in the occurrence of knowledge of Reflection.  The  commentator  Sayadaw,  therefore,  explained  with  above  phrase,  "***sabbe saṅkhārā***  ***suññati  pariggahetvā***   =  after  discerning  by  the  knowledge  of  Reflection  on conditioned things in a way that all kinds of conditioned things are void of self" etc., as beginning. 

It is right. \_\_\_\_ Only when the phenomenon of non-self of those conditioned things are kept in mind by knowledge, the penetrative knowing and seeing  on Four Noble Truths called ***sacca pa***ţ***ivedha*** can be accomplished well. Unless it is kept in mind, it can not be accomplished.  It is right. \_\_\_\_ Due to inability to keep in mind on that phenomenon of ***anatta***, the admonished of hermits, ***Sarabhanga*** etc.,  which  can preach on two kinds of phenomena only, ***anicca*** and ***dukkha*** through terminological usage of those phenomena but not ***anicca***, is designates as ***aniyyānika sāsanā*** by which deliverance from rounds of rebirth can not be accomplished, really. ***(Mah***āţī***-2-455)*** 

In  the  next  method  \_\_\_\_  With  referring  to  the  occurrence  of  void  of  essence  of ***anicca***, essence of ***sukkha***, essence of ***atta***, of those conditioned things, the commentator Sayadaw explained by those words,... "after discerning by the knowledge of Reflection on conditioned things in away that all kinds of conditioned things are void of self". It is right. Such conditioned thing lacks in such essence of ***nicca*** etc. It should be recognized, "that conditioned thing is void of that essence of ***nicca*** etc.,". 

Due to difficulty to know on the occurrence of void of self of conditioned things, the commentator  Sayadaw  continued  to  explain  again,  that  "***dvikotikā***  ***suññatā***  ***nupassan***ā" through a way that "***suññamidam attena vā*** ***attaniyena vā*** = all these conditioned things are void of both 'self' and "property related with self.." etc., in order to reach stability of ***suññata nupassan***ā, although it has been known frequently. In those **PAGE-350** words, conditioned things are absent in 'self', those are not 'self' for such situation; it is not the property of self for that situation. It is right. \_\_\_\_ Only when the 'self' is present, the property of self should be occurred. (Due to lack of self, property of self is also absent). Therefore, the commentator Sayadaw explained that "***suññamidam attena vā*** ***attaniyena vā*** = all these conditioned things are void of both "self" and "property related with self". 

The  reason  why  both  two  kinds, ***atta,  attaniya***,  are  void  in  conditioned  things  is that\_\_\_\_  although  the  meditator  scrutinizes  with  the  help  of  experiential  knowledge ***(paccakkha ñ***āṇ***a)*** and hypothetical knowledge ***(anumāna ñ***āṇ***a)***, both two kinds of ***atta attaniya*** can not be found in those conditioned things. It means that although scrutinizing by two kinds of experiential and hypothetical knowledge are performed, either a kind of being or a kind of conditioned thing, which depends on the occurrence of occurrence of property of self, which depends on the occurrence of capable of finishing of happiness-suffering by 'self', can not be seen. ***(Mah***āţī***-2-455)*** 

This  way  of  discerning,  "all  these  conditioned  things  are  void  of  both  'self'  and "property related with self" is called "***dvikotikā*** ***suññatā*** ***nupassan***ā". 

2. ***Catukotikā*** ***suññatānupassanā 

`      `***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-291)*** 

This  way  of  discerning,  ***catukotika  suññatānupassan***ā,  can  be  found  in Ā***neñjasappāya Sutta, Upari pa***ṇṇā***sa, page 50***, and the meaning is explained in ***Visuddhi Magga***, as follows.\_\_\_\_ 

`      `***Pali Quotation  (Vs-2-292)*** 

***(Mah***āţī***-2-456)*** 

According  to  exegeses  found  in  above  commentary  and  sub  commentary,  the meditator has to discern on these four kinds of nature, viz, 

1. the nature of absence of 'self' in internal five aggregates, 
1. the nature of absence of property related with self in internal five aggregates, 
1. the nature of absence of 'self' in external five aggregates, 
1. the nature of absence of property related with self in external five aggregates, by the help of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge. 

If  the  absence  of  ***atta-attaniya***  in  four  circumstances  can  be  seen  by  ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge, it can be said ***catuko***ţ***ika suññatānupassanā*** has been accomplished. **PAGE-351** 

1. ***nāham kvacani*** 

I  don't  see  'self'  ***(atta)***  in  any  kind  of  circumstance,  time,  ***dhamma***,  internal  five aggregates,  external  five  aggregates.  It  means  that  ***anattānupassanā***  must  be  performed through the discerning on the nature of absence of any kind of 'self' in each ***dhamma*** called five aggregate occurring in internal and external continuum, within three-time-phase. 

Due to discerning on the nature of void of self, that function of ***anattānupassanā*** is also designated as ***suññatā-nupassanā*** (contemplation on the nothingness). This is the first circumstance ***(ko***ţ***i)***. 

2. ***kassaci kiñcanatasamin*** 

The '***atta***' of oneself, which is worth keeping as property of anybody that deserves to be worried, is not seen; the '***atta***' of oneself, which is worth keeping as paraphernalia of anybody that deserves to be worried, is not seen; the '***atta***' of one self, which is worth keeping through any way of considerations as the elder brother, in case of elder brother's situation; or as lovely friend, in case of lovely friend's situation; or as paraphernalia, in case of occurrence of paraphernalia' is not seen. That kind of phenomenon must be discerned by ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge. This is the way of discerning in order to see absence of property related with self and  void  of  nature  of  ***attaniya***,  which  is  called  ***attaniya  suññatānupassan***ā.  This  is  the second circumstance. 

If there is neither '***atta***' of oneself nor 'property related with '***atta***', which is present really? There are only masses of conditioned things called ***dukkha sacca, sam***ụ***daya sacca (suddhasaṅkhāra puñjata)***. ***Vipassanā*** practice must be performed through seeing the nature of presence of masses of conditioned things but void of '***atta***' f oneself and ***attaniya***. When the knowledge of Non-self becomes strong and powerful the nature of absence of both ***atta*** and ***attaniya*** will be seen simultaneously. if the perishing phase of conditioned things can be seen clearly, one will be satisfied on the fact the absence of '***atta***' that is existing by durable essene. Unless the '***atta***' can be found, how those properties related with that ***atta*** will be present!  Furthermore it should be recognized the absence of creator  called '***parama atta***' which is related with ***atta*** again. 

**PAGE-352** 

***atta attaniya suññat***ā** 

"This majesty is brahma; great brahma; super person; he is a person who is unable to be overcome by anybody; actually he sees all things. he is an organizer; he is one who has learned well in absorption; he is father of beings, who are both still arising and has been arisen; we all are created by this majesty of brahma". ***(Di-1-17, Brahmajāla Sutta)*** 

It must be discerned on conditioned things in order to see the absence of '***atta***'(self), which is related with that creator, '***atta***', which deserves to be worried, which occurs through consideration of ***sama***ṇ***a, brahma*** who accept opinions out of the Buddha's admonishment, as shown in above ways. Therefore the meditator has to reason as ***anatta, anatta*** by discerning on conditioned things which are void of both ***atta*** of oneself and property related with ***atta (attaniya)*** for three periods, past, future, present and two kinds of continuum, internal and external. 

3. ***na ca (mama) kvacani*** 

Those conditioned things occurring in three periods and two continuums, must be discerned as ***anatta, anatta*** through discerning on the nature of absence of '***atta***' of other in any kind of situation, time, ***dhamma***, internal aggregates, or external aggregates. This is the third circumstance. 

4. ***mama kisaninci kincanatatthi*** 

That meditator does not see the fact that "***atta*** of other is present as paraphernalia of himself that deserves to be worried for internal external ***dhammas***. It means that '***atta***' of other, which is worth keeping through any way of considerations as the elder brother, in case of elder brothers' situation; or as lovely friends, in case of lovely friend's situation; or as paraphernalia, in case of occurrence of paraphernalia, is not seen. Those conditioned things should  be  discerned  as  ***anatta,  anatta***  through  seeing  on  that  nature  with  the  help  of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge. This is the fourth circumstance. 

These  number  (3)  and  (4)  means  that  although  internal  and  external  conditioned things  are  scrutinized  by  knowledge,  both  '***atta***'  of  other  and  that  '***atta***'  is  present  as paraphernalia of himself that deserves to be worried, can not be soon. This opinion usually occurs by means of consideration of heretics, such as "there is external male person who exists in order to provide my benefit; my all purposes are accomplished by efficiency of that external  person".  Therefore  it  should  be  recognized  on  meaning  of  these  four  kinds  of discernments as follows.\_\_\_\_ 

1. ***nāham kvacani*** \_\_\_\_ This first kind of discernment instructs in order to see the nature of absence of ***atta*** of himself in conditioned things. 

**PAGE-353** 

2. ***kassaci kiñcanatasmin*** \_\_\_\_ This second kind of discernment instructs in order to see the nature of absence of relationship between "***atta***" of himself and "***atta***" of other. 
2. ***na ca (mama) kvacani*** \_\_\_\_ This third kind of discernment instructs in order to see the nature of absence of ***atta*** of other in conditioned things. 
2. ***(mama) kisaminci kincanatatthi*** \_\_\_\_ This four kind of discernment instructs in order to see  the  nature  of  absence  of  relationship  between  '***atta***'  of  other  and  paraphernalia  of himself. ***(Vs-2-291,292, Mah***āţī***-2-455,456)*** 

The meditator has to discern on masses of conditioned things as ***anatta, anatta***, by seeing the nature of absence of ***atta, attaniya*** in two kinds of continuums for three periods. Thus it can be said the way of discernment called ***catuko***ţ***i kasuññatā*** has been accomplished thoroughly. 

3. ***cha kotika-cha hākārasuññatā*** ***nupassanā 

`      `***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-292, C***ūļ***aniddesa-183)*** 

In accordance with above Pali Text and commentary, it should be recognized on the fact  that  ultimate   ***dhammas***,  which  are  objects  of  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards Formations are also aggregates-bases-elements-controlling faculties-principle of dependent origination, similar to previous stages of ***Vipassanā*** knowledge. 

It  must  be  discerned  as  ***suññam,  suññam***,  in  next  method,  \_\_\_\_  ***anatta,  anatta, anicca, anicca***, by seeing the nature of nothingness, voidness, absence of these, viz, 

1. ***atta*** (self) 
1. ***attaniya*** (property related with self) 
1. both ***atta***  which  is  weighed  pros  and  cons  as ***nicca*** (permanence)  and  other  anything anybody, 
1. the nature of durability, ***dhuva***, 
1. the nature of eternalism, ***sassata***, 
1. the nature of lack of change and alteration, ***avipari***ṇā***ma***, respectively. 

Those ways of discernment shown in number 1, and 2 are called ***anattānupassan***ā, while number 3, 4, 5, 6 are called ***aniccānupassan***ā. Due to discerning on voidness of these 6 kinds **PAGE-354** of nature of  conditioned things, this way  of discernment is called ***cha ko***ţ***ika suññatā*** ***nupassanā*** ***= cha hākāra suññatā*** ***nupassanā.*** 

4. ***attha*** ***ākāra = a***ţţ***ha ko***ţ***ika suññatā*** ***nupassanā*** 

It must be discerned by (8) kinds of modes on each group mentioned above, from corporeal  aggregate  to  aging-death  belonging  to  aggregates-bases-elements-controlling faculties-truths-principle of dependent-origination, one by one. For 14 instance \_\_\_\_ The corporeal ***dhammas*** are void of 

1. ***nicca sāra*** = permanent essence, 
1. ***dukkha sāra*** = durable essence, 
1. ***sukha sāra*** = pleasurable essence, 
1. ***atta sāra*** = essence of self, 
1. permanent occurrence 
1. durable occurrence 
1. eternal occurrence as '***sassata***' 
1. absence of change and alteration called ***a-vipari***ṇā***ma dhamma***, respectively. 

It should be recognized that those are void of any kind of essence as heartwood is absent in reed, caster oil plant, a kind of fig usually found near water courses, butterfly bush, flame  of  the  forest  or  parrot  tree,  foam,  water  bubble,  mirage,  banana,  thing  shown  by magician. ***(Vs-2-292)*** 

5. ***dasahākāra = dasakotika suññatā*** ***nupassanā*** 

Corporeal ***dhammas*** are discerned as 

1. ***rittato = dhammas*** which are void of any kind of essence, due to absence of ***nicca sāra*** etc; 
1. ***tucchato*** = vain ***dhamma***, due to absence of ***incca sāra*** etc; 
1. ***suññato = dhammas*** which are void of essence of '***atta***'; 
1. ***anattato = anatta***, due to occurrence of non-self; 
1. ***anissariyato = anissariya***, due to occurrence which is not amenable to control; due to incapable of being amenable to control by anybody; 

**PAGE-355** 

6. ***akāmakāriyato*** = For a person who wants to make household utensils by foam, as his purpose can not be  accomplished, \_\_\_\_ similarly, for  a person who wants to perform corporeal ***dhammas***  as  the  permanent  occurrence,  his  desired  performance  can  not  be accomplished. In other words, \_\_\_ there is no subject, the doer of action ***(kiriyā)*** through one's desire. It is, therefore, discerned as ***akāmakāriya***; 
6. ***a  labbhanīyato  =  a  labbhanīya***  =  it  can  not  be  accomplished  by  wishing  that  "may corporeality be this way, may it not be this way" ... etc; 
6. ***avasavattakato = avasavattaka, (a)*** due to occurrence of non-indulgence of oneself to other's desire; ***(b)*** due to occurrence of non-indulgence of other to one's desire; 16 
6. ***parato = para*** , due to incapable of providing on continuity of corporeality and mentality of oneself as continuity of corporeality and mentality of other; 
6. ***vivittato*** = As corporeal ***dhammas*** are void of creator, ***atta***, corporeal ***dhammas*** are void of causal and resultant ***dhammas,*** resulting in discerning as ***vivitta***. It is right.\_\_\_\_ Causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** never exist as a stage of pregnancy. Causal ***dhammas*** never stand on resultant ***dhammas*** and vice versa. Those are existing as specific ones but resultant ***dhammas*** arise depending upon causal ***dhammas***. Thus causal ***dhammas*** are void from resultant ***dhammas*** and vice versa. 

It must be discerned similarly on those ***dhammas*** from feeling-aggregate to aging- death. ***(Vs-2-293)*** 

6. ***dvādasa hākāra suññatānupassanā*** 

Corporeal ***dhammas*** are 

1. ***na satto*** = not beings = not beings who are weighed pros and cons as '***att***' by heretics ***(titthiya)*** who are out of the Buddha's admonishment; 
1. ***na jīvo*** = not vitalistic force = not living being who is weighed pros and cons by heretics; 
1. ***na  naro***  =  not  person  who  is  capable  of  performing  =  not  '***atta***'  which  is  capable  of performing; 
1. ***na m***āṇ***avo*** = not ***m***āṇ***va*** = not '***atta***' which is source of pride; 
1. ***na itth***ī = not femininity = not '***atta***' which is the womb of pregnancy; 
1. ***na puriso*** = not musculine = not musculine who is weighed pros and cons by heretics; not '***atta***' which is capable of existing previously as predominant one; 
1. ***na attā*** = not '***atta***' = not ***atta***, which is weighed pros and cons by heretics as the place of pride; 

**PAGE-356** 

`  `Corporeal ***dhammas*** is designated as both ***aham*** ( = I ) and ***atta*** ( = self ) by heretics with 

opinion of ***a***ţţ***adi***ţţ***hi*** (wrong view of self), due to occurrence of standing place of corporeal ***dhammas*** for wrong view which is worth designating as ... "I" ... 

8. ***na attaniyam*** = not property of '***atta***'. 

`  `[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_ The corporeal ***dhammas***, 18 actually, has not those nature, ***atta, jīva***, etc. 

Therefore  the  phrase,  "***rūpam  na  satto***  =  corporeal  ***dhammas***  are  not  beings"  etc  are shown, in order to show the way of discerning on the nature of nothingness. Therefore through those phrases, from number 1 to 8, it instructs to discern the nature of voidness of ***atta*** of corporeal ***dhammas***. Through coming four phrases, it instructs to discern the nature of  absence  to  be  worried  and  the  absence  of  any  thing  related  with ***atta***  in  corporeal ***dhammas***. ***(Mah***āţī***-2-458)*** 

9. ***nāham*** = not '**I**' 
9. ***na mama*** = not property of my ***atta***; 
9. ***na aññassa*** = not property of ***atta*** of other; 
9. ***na kassaci*** = not property of ***atta*** of anybody; 

[**Note:**\_\_\_  It  is  because  there  is  neither  ***atta***  of  oneself  nor  ***atta***  of  other  in  corporeal ***dhammas.***  It  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  the  meaning  shown  by  the  word,  ***na attaniyam***, is explicit again by three words, ***na mama, na aññassa, na kassaci*** indirectly. ***(Mah***āţī***-2-458)*** 

It must be discerned on remaining ***dhammas***, from feeling aggregate to aging-death, in this way. ***(Vs-2-293, Mah***āţī***-2-457,458)*** 

7. ***dvācattā*** ***līsā ***ākāra - suññatānupassanā*** 

The way of discernment through these  (42) modes is presented in order to attain stability of ***suññatānupassanā*** in this section. Some of which belongs to fourth '***to***' method are presented in previous section in order to attain stability of ***kalāpasammasana ñ***āṇ***a*** (the knowledge  of  Comprehension).  Here  remaining  words  which  has  not  explained  will  be presented again as follows.\_\_\_\_ 

***asāranībhūtato*** = Corporeal ***dhammas*** are incapable of removing danger and are not worth designating as refuge, resulting in occurrence of non-refuge ***(asaranībhūta)***. It must be discerned as ***"asāranībhūta"***, by seeing that nature of non-refuge. 

***anassādato*** = Corporeal ***dhammas*** are not worth pleasing. Due to this reason, it must be  discerned  on  corporeal  ***dhammas***  as  ***anassāda***.  [This  word  is  absent  in  Pali  Texr  of ***Niddesa.*** If it is present, there will be 43 modes in that way of discerning. ***(Mah***āţī***-2-458)***]* **PAGE-357** 

ā***dīnavato*** = If the arising of corporeal ***dhammas*** is present, all kinds of masses of danger will be attained. Due to this reason, it must be discerned on corporeal ***dhammas*** as ***ādīnava*** (danger). (This word also includes in forty "***to***"). 

***samudayato*** = It must be discerned as ***samudaya*** through the nature of arising. ***atthangamato***  =  It  must  be  discerned  as  ***atthangamato***  through  the  nature  of 

cessation. 

[ **Notes**:\_\_\_\_ Causal ***dhammas*** which can produce corporeality, mentality called conditioned things  are  also  impermanent  ***dhammas***.  Resultant  corporeality  and  mentality  are  also impermanent ***dhammas***. The occurrence of impermanent nature of corporeality, mentality called conditioned things is related with the occurrence of impermanent nature of causal ***dhammas***. The meditator has to discern that relationship between occurrence of impermanent nature of resultant ***dhammas*** and causal ***dhammas***. Furthermore, the nature of absence of essence of permanence ***(nicca sāra)*** of conditioned things must also be discerned by insight. If discernment can be accomplished in that way, as the knowledge of Contemplation on impermanence ***(aniccā*** ***nupassanā*** ***ñ***āṇ***a)*** clarifies the nature of nothingness of conditioned things that "conditioned things occur depending upon other's desire called causal ***dhammas*** and those are void of essence of permanence", similarly, these two ways of discernments are also explained with the intention that those also clarify the nature of nothingness called void of durable essence of ***atta*** in conditioned things.***(Mah***āţī***-2-458)***. This way of discernment includes two precesses, how resultant ***dhammas*** arise, due to arising of causal ***dhammas (paccayato udaya dassana)*** and how resultant ***dhammas*** cease, due to cessation of causal ***dhammas (paccayato vaya dassana)***. It also belongs to two ways of discernments on the process of momentary arising and cessation of resultant and causal ***dhammas*** individually, which are called ***kha***ṇ***ato udayabbaya dassana***. 

***assādato*** = It must be discerned as ***assāda*** = the nature of pleasing and satisfying ones called happiness ***(sukha)*** and mentally agreeable feeling ***(somanassa)***. 

Conditioned things, corporeal ***dhammas*** etc., are also worth discerning as pleasing and satisfying ones. 

* ***yam kho rūpam pa***ţ***icca upajjati sukkam somanassam, ayam rūpassa assādo. (Sam-2-23)***  
- Bodily  agreeable  feeling  and  mentally  agreeable  feeling,  which  arise  depending  upon corporeal ***dhammas***, are the nature of pleasingness of corporeal ***dhammas***. ***(Sam-2-23)*** 

Thus the way of discernment on corporeal ***dhammas*** as pleasing and satisfying ones can clarify the nature of nothingness, due to shoeing clearly on occurrence of causal and resultant ***dhammas***. 

It must be discerned as ***ādīnava*** (danger). 

* ***yam rūpam aniccam dukkham vipari***ṇā***madhammam, ayam rūpassa*** ***ādīnavo. (Sam-2-21)*** 
- Such corporeal ***dhammas*** are impermanence, suffering, change and alteration. These kinds of nature, viz, impermanence, suffering, change and alteration are dangers of the corporeal ***dhammas***. ***(Sam-2-21)*** 

**PAGE-358** 

Thus, owing to clarification of the nature of nothingness, the voidness of nature of permanence,  happiness,  never  change  and  alteration ***(avipari***ṇā***ma  dhamma)***,  the  way  of discerning on dangers called impermanence, suffering, change and alteration of corporeal ***dhammas***, clarifies the nature of nothingness in corporeal ***dhammas***. It should be recognized the fact that although this way of discernment on danger has been said repeatedly in previous section, it is said again here in order to intend to reject the nature of pleasing and satisfying ones ***(assāda)***. ***(Mah***āţī***-2-458)*** 

***nissara***ṇ***ato*** = It must be discerned as ***nissara***ṇ***a, nissara***ṇ***a*** (= factor of deliverance) 

* ***yo rūpe chandarāgavinayo chandarāgappahānam, idam rūpasssa nissara***ṇ***am. (Sam-2- 23)*** 
- Removing of selfish desire and lust on corporeal ***dhammas*** is the ***dhammas*** which is factor of deliverance from corporeal ***dhammas. (Sam-2-23)*** 

According to this way of preaching, the way of discernment on nature of factor of deliverance called ***nissara***ṇ***a***, clarifies the nature of nothingness in corporeal ***dhammas***. 

Therefore, it should be recognized the fact that various ways of discernments, the nature of arising ***(samudaya)***, the nature of cessation ***(atthangama)***, etc., are practices which improve ***suññatānupassan***ā. 

8. **Forty two modes of discernments** 
1) ***aniccato*** (through impermanence), 
1) ***dukkhato*** (through suffering), 
1) ***rogato*** (through incurable disease), 
1) ***ga***ṇ***dato*** (through open sore), 
1) ***sallato*** (through thorn), 
1) ***aghato*** (through harmfulness), 
1) ***ābādhato*** (through wound), 
1) ***parato*** (through other), 
1) ***palokato*** (through destructible), 
1) ī***tito*** (through dreadfulness), 
1) ***upaddavato*** (through penalty imposed by the monarch), 
1) ***bhayato*** (through terror), 
1) ***upasaggato*** (through torture), 
1) ***calato*** (through shaking), 
1) ***pabanguto*** (through dissolution), 
1) ***addhuvato*** (through indurability), 
1) ***at***āṇ***ato*** (through un-protection), 
18) ***ale***ṇ***ato*** (through guardless), 
18) ***asara***ṇ***ato*** (through non-refuge), 
18) ***asara***ṇī***bhūtato*** (through not appropriate refuge), 
18) ***rittato*** (through void of essence of durablity, happiness, self), 
18) ***tucchato*** (through vanity of essence of durability ect.), 
18) ***suññato*** (through nothingness of various kind of self), 
18) ***anattato*** (through non-self), 
18) ***anassādato*** (through unpleasing), 
18) ***ādīnavato*** (through danger), 
18) ***vipari***ṇā***madhammato*** (through change and alteration), 
18) ***asārakato*** (through no durable essence), 
18) ***aghamūlato*** (through source of suffering), 
18) ***vadhakato*** (through killer), 
18) ***vibhavato*** (through losing), 
18) ***sāsavato*** (through oject of cankers), 
18) ***sankhatato*** (through conditioned nature), 
18) ***mārāmisato*** (through source of various ***mara***), 
18) ***jātidhammato*** (through arising), 
18) ***jarādhammato*** (through aging), 
18) ***vyādhidhammato*** (through decaying), 
18) ***mara***ṇ***adhammato*** (through death), 
18) ***soka-parideva-dukkha-domanassa-upāyāsa  dhammato***  (through  worry-lamentation  - suffering meutally disagreeable feeling woe), 
18) ***samudayato*** (through arising), 
18) ***atthangamato*** (through cessation) 
18) ***assādato \*ādīnavto*** (through pleasing ones) 
18) ***nissara***ṇ***ato*** (through deliverance) 

***(Vs-2-293)*** 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_ If number 25, ***anassādato***, is omitted, total will be 42. The word ***ādinavato*** can be found in both serial number 26 and 43. If it is counted on those serial number 26 and 43, as single, there will be 42 modes of nature totally. In previous section of ***kalāpa sammasana***, (10) kinds of characters of impermanence, (25) kinds of characters of suffering, (5) kinds of characters  of  non-self  are  explained  in  three  groups.  In  this  section,  it  is  presented  in accordance with Pali Test and commentary. If it is possible, discernment should be performed again  as  above  order.  Those  ***dhammas***,  from  feeling  aggregate  to  aging-death,  must  be discerned in similar way. Interpretation of some words, which are not clear should be read again  on  previous  section  of  ***kalāpa  sammasana***.  In  previous  stage,  both  phenomena  of arising and perishing away are discerned by ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge. In this stage, actually only the phenomenon of perishing away is discerned.] 

**PAGE-359** 

9. **The person who is invisible by king of death** 

***Pāli Quotation (khu-1-448, C***ūļ***ani-180)*** 

***Moghrāja*** = Devotee Mogharāja hermit…  

***sato =*** after fulfilling with mindfulness 

***sadā = every time, ū***hacca*** = and removing 

***attānuddi***ţţ***him***  =  wrong  view  of  personality  by  the  knowledge  of  analyzing  Mentality Corporeality and the knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition, 

***lokam*** = world of conditioned things called Noble Truth of Suffering and Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering, 

***avekkhassu*** = must be discerned by discerned by ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge over and over again, ***suññato*** = through void of permanence, happiness, self, pleasantness. 

***evam*** = If it can be discerned in this way, 

***maccutaro*** = surpassing on King of Death who governs (31) realms, 

***siyā*** = will be occurred. 

***avekkhantam*** = The person who discerns all conditioned things called the Noble Truth of Suffering and the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering, 

***evam*** = through the nature of void of essence of permanence, happiness, self, durability, eternalism, never change and alteration etc., 

***na passati*** = can not be seen 

***maccurāja*** = by the king of Death who governs (31) realms. ***(Khu-1-448, C***ūļ***ani-180; Vs-2- 293)*** 

10. ***Bhaya* (terror) and *nand***ī **(pleasingness)** 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-294)*** 

In this way, although the nature of nothingness can be seen and kept in mind through (42) modes of nature of five aggregates after scrutinizing on nature of ***anicca, dukkha, anatta*** of conditioned things, in the continuum of meditator who performs ***vipassanā*** practice by means of three kind of contemplations, viz, ***aniccā*** ***nupassanā, dukkhā*** ***nupassanā, anattā*** ***passan***ā,  only,  the  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards  Formations  can  arise  consequently. Therefore  the  meditator  who  scrutinizes  and  reasons  conditioned  things  by  three  general characters, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta***, after seeing the nature of nothingness,\_\_\_\_ can abandon both 

1. terror (***bhaya***) which will occur depending on destruction of conditioned things due to lack of neutralizing on conditioned things and 
1. pleasingness  (***nand***ī),  the  craving  together  with  pleasingness,  which  will  occur depending on completion of those conditioned things. In the next method\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-360** 

1. Due to seeing on phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things only, terror with knowledge called ***ñ***āṇ***abhaya*** which arises by means of terrible  appearance and 
1. pleasingness (***nand***ī), which arises by means of discerning on conditioned things as three general characters called ***sammasana,*** can be an abandoned. 

Due  to  capable  of  abandoning  terror  and  pleasingness  the  mind  stands  muddle condition  and  neutralizes  on  conditioned  things.  All  kinds  of  conditioned  things  are  not obsessed as 'I' of 'my properties'. It is right.\_\_\_ There is no opportunity to fall and occur terror and pleasingness on to conditioned  things. Actually, the equanimity of minds stands well on conditioned things as a man who has divorced wife. 

A man got married a very profound woman. Due to seeing sexual misconduct of that woman with adulterers, that man divorced his wife. As in the continuum of that man, neither anger  nor displeasingness occurs but neutrality and equanimity arise in him although he sees sexual misconduct of that woman after divorced\_\_\_\_ similarly\_\_\_\_  

When  this  meditator  scrutinizes  and  generalizes  conditioned  things  through  the knowledge of Reflection ( ***pa***ţ***isaṅkhānupassanā*** ***ñ***āṇ***a*** ), due to presence of strong desire to deliverance from conditioned things, the equanimity of mind arises in him without seeing any conditioned  things  which  is  worth  obsessing  as  "I-  my  property,"but  abandoning  of  two extremities called terror pleasingness (***bhaya-nandh***ī)  

The consciousness of that practicing meditator who knows, discerns, sees  in this way, shrinks, wrinkles, backs of and does not diffuse in (31) realms; it never enter with enjoyment into (31) realms; equanimity and disenchantment stands well on all conditioned things. 

As water drops shrinks, wrinkles, sinks and does not diffuse on surface of leaf of lotus, as a feather or a block of meat shrinks, wrinkles, backs off and does not diffuse when it is  thrown  into  fire\_\_\_\_  similarly,  the  consciousness  of  that  practicing  meditator  shrinks, wrinkles,  backs  off  and  does  not  diffuse  into  (31)  realms.  Both  equanimity  and disenchantment  stands  well  on  those  realms.  In  the  continuum  of  that  meditator  with equanimity  and  disenchantment  in  this  way,  the  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards Formations called ***saṅkhārupakkhā*** ***ñ***āṇ***a*** arises consequently. ***(Vs-2-294)*** **PAGE-361** 

After  discerning  on  phenomenon  of  perishing  away  of  conditioned  things  at  the beginning of the knowledge of Dissolution the practicing meditator continues to perform ***vipassanā  practice by taking the object of phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things  in  this  stage  of  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards  Formations  similarly.  During performing ***vipassanā*** practice by generalizing on three characters, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta*** of conditioned things alternatively, the nature of terror, danger, disenchantment of conditioned things appear successively. Afterwards the mind is led to a situation which is free from conditioned  things  by  taking  object  of  phenomenon  of  perishing  away,  resulting  in appearance of two kinds of nature, desire for deliverance and reflection. 

For some meditators, it does not take a long time to develop successive knowledge from knowledge of Dissolution to the knowledge of Reflection. For some meditators it takes a little longer in some stages. When the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formation is quite close to appear in insight of meditator, the consciousness of ***vipassanā*** becomes subtler and subtler.  If  ***vipassanā  practice  is  performed  continuously,  by  alternative  discerning  on corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** occurring in three periods, past, future and present, two kinds of continuums, internal and external, three general characters, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta*** the consciousness, ***anicca,  dukkha, anatta***, the consciousness of ***vipassanā*** practice becomes subtler and subtler. 

If the mind of meditation fixedly stands on the character of any one kid, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta*** by taking object of phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things occurring in internal continuum, those conditioned things occurring in internal continuum should  be  discerned  continuously.  If  the  mind  of  meditation  fixedly  stands  on  external objects,  those  external objects  should  be  discerned  continuously.  At  that  time  alternative discerned on external and internal objects is not essential. It is because both internal and external objects are well experienced for the meditator. 

During discerning on internal corporeality and mentality alternatively, if the mind of meditation fixedly stands on object, those internal object must be discerned continuously. If the mind of meditation becomes subtle and quiet during discerning corporal ***dhammas***, it should  be  discerned  continuously  on  those  corporeal  ***dhammas***.  It  must  be  recognized similarly on discernment of mentality or that of external object. When the mind of meditation becomes  stabler  and  stabler,  corporeal  ***dhammas***  can  not  be  discerned  sometimes.  Five- doors-cognitive processes, eye-door-cognitive process etc., are also unable to be discerned. At  that  time  only  mind-door-cognitive  processes  can  be  discerned  and  it  is  better  in advancement of ***vipassanā*** practice. 

Among those mental ***dhammas*** of mind-door-cognitive processes, mental ***dhammas*** of wholesome groups must be discerned as priority. Wholesome impulsions of mind-door- cognitive process must be discerned as priority. If corporeality is also able to be discerned well \_\_\_\_ alternative discernment should be performed over and over again as follows. \_\_\_\_ **PAGE-362** 

1. discerning on corporeality \_\_\_\_ 

corporeality – perishing away – ***anicca (dukkha, anatta)*** 

2. discerning on mentality \_\_\_\_ 

mentality – perishing away – ***anicca (dukkha, anatta)*** 

discerning knowledge – perishing away – ***anicca (dukkha, anatta);*** 

If the meditator has got absorption ***(jhāna)*** because he is the person with vehicle of ***samatha*** called ***samatha yānika*** person, it is appropriate time to perform yoking method ***(yuganaddha  naya)***  due  to  finishing  to  discern  miscellineous  conditioned  thing.  Each absorption he has attained must be entered and then mental ***dhammas*** of that absorption should  be  discerned  as  the  object  of  ***vipassanā***  practice.  For  instance  \_\_\_\_  The  first absorption of any long time. Some meditation subject must be entered firstly. After emerging from that absorption, those mental ***dhammas*** of first absorption must be discerned as ***anicca, dukkha, anatta*** alternatively. Then the second absorption, third absorption etc., should be discerned similarly. If the meditator has got eight kinds of attainments ***(a***ţţ***ha samāpatti)*** for eight kinds of ***kasi***ṇ***a*** objects, mental ***dhammas*** of those eight kinds of attainments can also be  discerned  by  means  of  yoking  method.  If  he  has  got  absorptions  of  four  protective meditation subjects ***(caturā*** ***rakkha kamma***ţţ***ahāna)*** those mental ***dhammas*** of absorptions of four  protective  meditation  subjects  are  also  able  to  be  discerned  similarly.  Depended corporeality of those absorptions must be discerned sometimes. Discerning knowledge must be discerned by succeeding ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge again, sometimes. 

During performing ***vipassanā practice, some meditator usually stays in this stage of knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations for a long time. Some meditators, however, has no need to stay in this stage for a long time but readily enters into peacefullness element called '***santipada***'. Gnerally, when ***Vipassana*** Knowledge which sees phenomena of perishing away in both internal and external objects, becomes powerful, it usually enters into the field where  has  no  phenomenon  of  arising  and  passing  away  without  staying  in  this  stage  of knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations for long time. If ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge is not vigorous, it is not easy to enter into the field where has no phenomenon of arising and passing away resulting in staying in quiet stage for a long time. 

12. **The most important time** 

For  a  meditator  with  previous  great  perfections  ***(paramita)***,successive  stages  of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge from the knowledge of Arising and Passing Away to the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations, which has been presented can be achieved within one sitting period. Whether those kind of knowledge are attained within one sitting period or not, by the time successive development of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge from the knowledge of arising and passing away to the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations, this period, plays vital important role in attainment of Path-Knowledge for the meditator, really. 

**PAGE-363** 

It  is  essential  to  practice  throughout  four  deportments  continuously.  ***Vipassanā*** practice must be performed every moment, walking, coming, flexing, stretching, through any one kind of method or two kinds or three kinds or all kinds, viz corporeality and mentality two-fold  method,  five-fold  aggregates  method,  twelve-fold  bases  method,  (18)  elements method, (12) factors of dependent-origination method, by taking the object of phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things occurring in three periods, and two kinds of continuum. Those persons who are unable to overcome the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations should perform continuously in order to attain matured ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge. It is the same as precedent practiced by the most Venerable Rāhula Thera. 

13. **Way  of  discerning  on  deportments,  *(iriyāpatha)  –*  clear  comprehension *(sampajañña)*** 

Due to occurrence of pure stage of  ***vipassanā practice, non-real corporealities must be omitted from objects of ***vipassanā practice in this stage. By standing on any place of corridor, concentration must be developed and then corporealities and mentalities must be kept  in  mind.  During  keeping  in  mind  on  corporal  ***dhammas***,  only  real  corporealities consisting in (6) doors, (42) bodily parts must be kept in mind. During keeping in mind on mental  ***dhammas***,  those  mental  ***dhammas***  occurring  in  each  door  and  mental  ***dhammas*** occurring in mind-door-cognitive processes, which can give rise to deportments, must be kept in mind together with mental ***dhammas*** of life-continuum. 

***Vipassanā*** practice must be carried out by generalizing on three characters of those corporealities and mentalities. When ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge becomes powerful, the meditator has to walk slowly on the corridor. By walking slowly, ***vipassanā*** practice must be performed continuously. All kinds of discernments, which has been presented orderly, 40 'to' methods etc., can be performed over and over again at the moment of going, walking etc. ***Vipassanā*** practice has to be carried out by keeping in mind on corporealities  and mentalities which are occurring in each moment, viz, going, forward, walking, backward, seeing straight forward, glancing obliquely, flexing, stretching, taking double robes-bowl etc, eating, drinking, biting, licking, defecating, urinating, walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, awaking, talking, staying quietly etc. When ***Vipassanā*** knowledge becomes powerful, only phenomenon of perishing away of those conditioned things must be discerned continuously. 

Sometimes, discerning ***Vipassanā*** knowledge called mental ***dhammas*** occurring in mind-door-cognitive  processes  of  ***Vipassanā***  practice  must  be  discerned  as  object  of succeeding  ***Vvipassanā***  knowledge.  Those  conditioned  things  occurring  in  external continuums must also be discerned similarly. 

Sometimes, ***vipassanā*** practice must be performed by taking objects of phenomena of perishing away of factors of dependent-origination from successive previous existences to the end  of  future  existence  orderly.  Sometimes  discerning  ***Vipassanā***  knowledge  must  be discerned by succeeding ***Vipassanā*** knowledge again. All conditioned things occurring in both internal and external continuums must be discerned thoroughly. 

14. ***Discern by opening the eye***   

If ***vipassanā*** practice can be performed continuously by taking object of phenomenon of  perishing  away  of  conditioned  things  occurring  in  all  four  kinds  of  deportments thoroughly,  **PAGE-364**  very  rapid  occurrence  of  phenomena  of  perishing  away  of  both internal and external continuums will be seen by knowledge. At that time, ***vipassanā*** practice should be performed continuously by either standing or sitting on any place of corridor. When  very  rapid  phenomena  of  perishing  away  of  conditioned  things  appear  in  insight, discernment should be performed by opening the eye. At that time, due to lack of experience at the beginning stage, everyplace, living or non-living things, can be seen as corporeal uits. If every thing is seen in that way, all kind of living and non-living things must be discerned by breaking down each kind of compactness in order to reach the field of ultimate reality. When ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge becomes powerful again, only ultimate nature of corporealities, but  not  corporeal  units,  will  be  seen  by  penetrative  knowledge.  At  that  time,  ***vipassanā*** practice must be carried out continuously by taking object of phenomenon of perishing away of those ultimate ***dhammas***. Similarly mental ***dhammas*** occurring in living beings of external world should be  discerned as a whole. Alternative discernment on internal and external continuums should be performed in order to attain ability to discern every conditioned thing in  every  deportment  continuously.  If  it  is  possible  to  discern  in  that  way,  ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge,  which  knows  and  sees  only  phenomenon  of  perishing  away  of  conditioned things, becomes powerful and finally it will reach into the stage of knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations successively. 

15. **If mind of meditation fixedly stands on object of conditioned things…** 

Due  to  presence  of  balanced  efficiency  between  faith  and  wisdom,  effort  and concentration,  the  mind  of  meditation  fixedly  stands  on  the  object  of  phenomenon  of perishing away of conditioned things, during discerning on either internal continuum or 44 external  continuum  continuously.  The  mind  of  meditation  usually  occurs  as  inactive condition. Alternative discernment on internal continuum and external continuum, corporeal ***dhammas***  and  mental  ***dhammas***,  causal  ***dhammas***  and  resultant  ***dhammas***,  ***anicca***  and ***dukkha, dukkha*** and ***anatta*** etc., should not be performed during this situation. If alternative discernment of any kind is performed, the concentration of ***vipassanā*** practice will be backed off consequently. During discerning on conditioned things occurring in internal continuum, if mind of meditation fixedly stands on those objects, ***vipassanā*** practice must be performed continuously  on  those  objects  without  changing  on  others  and  so  forth.  Sometimes, discerning ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge must be discerned by succeeding ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge again. Due to presence of well experience to all kinds of discernments, the most favorite way of discernment can be chosen in this stage. 

16. **Individual preference *(puggalijjhāsaya)*** 

If  the  meditator  is  a  person  with  vehicle  of  samatha,  mental  ***dhammas***  of  each absorption, which arises through the most preferable meditation subject, should be discerned by  means  of  the  character  of  non-self  (***anatta***)  as  priority.  ***Vipassanā***  practice  must  be performed **PAGE-365** continuously by taking object of phenomenon of perishing away of both mental ***dhammas*** of absorption state and mental ***dhammas*** of discerning knowledge, with inclination towards the Unconditioned Element, peaceful ***nibbāna*** where phenomenon of arising and passing away of conditioned things can not be found. Sometimes, four great elements  and  derived  corporealities,  which  are  bases  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  absorption, which are of totally 54 kinds lying inside the heart, must be discerned. Sometimes, discerning ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge must be discerned as the object of ***vipassanā*** practice again. 

Unless the field where phenomenon of arising and perishing away of conditioned things can not be found, is transferred easily although it is discerned in this way repeatedly, all corporealities and mentalities occurring in three periods, past, future and present must be kept in mind and either twofold-corporeality and mentality method or fivefold aggregates method must be applied as ***vipassanā*** practice again. Those objects of conditioned things occurring in the whole period from successive past existences to the end of future existence must  be  discerned.  Alternative  discernment  on  internal  and  external  continuum  must  be performed  again.  Then  each  factor  of  dependent-origination,  must  be  discerned  without reasoning  as  "due  to  occurrence  of  ignorance,  kamma-formations  arises"  etc,  but  by generalizing on those factors, which had been occurred or which are occurring or which will occur in future, as they really are. All conditioned things occurring in three periods, must be discerned  straight  through  from  successive  past  existences  to  the  end  of  future  one. Alternative discernment on internal continuum and external continuum must be performed over and over again. The general character of non-self should be discerned as priority. 

If conditioned things are ground by ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge over and over again in this way, ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge, which is discerning on the phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things, will become very powerful, resulting in rapid appearance of phenomena of perishing away of conditioned things in the insight of the meditator. The consciousness of ***vipassanā*** practice also fixedly stands on the object of phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things consequently. 

While the mind of meditation fixedly stands on object of phenomenon  of perishing away of conditioned things, it is free from two kinds of extremities, terror and pleasingness due to lack of worry and desire on conditioned things, in the continuum of meditator. At that time ***vipassanā*** practice must be performed by taking object of mental ***dhammas*** of 48 the most preferable absorption with inclination towards ***nibbāna*** which is free from phenomenon of  perishing  away  of  conditioned  things.  In  this  stage  some  meditators  prefer  to  discern mental ***dhammas*** of the fourth absorption, while some meditators prefer to discern mental ***dhammas*** of the third absorption. Individual preference varies among most meditators. At that  time  discerning  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  must  be  discerned  by  succeeding  ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge again. **PAGE-366** 

If the meditator is a person with vehicle of pure ***vipassanā*** ***(suddha vipassanāyānika puggala)*** and has not attained any kind of absorption, he must discern wholesome mental ***dhammas***, which are occurring by taking the object of corporeal ***dahammas***, as priority. At that time the concentration associating with ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge usually becomes stronger and stronger resulting in stability of mind of meditation on the object of phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things. When ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge becomes powerful the object of phenomenon of perishing away of corporeal ***dhammas*** can not be seen but that of perishing away of mental ***dhammas*** only can be seen by insight. At that time it should not be tried  intentionally  to  see  phenomenon  of  perishing  away  of  corporeal  ***dhammas***.  If  the meditator scrutinizes in order to see the nature of corporeal ***dhammas***, the concentration usually  falls  back  and  mind  of  meditation  becomes  unstable  condition.  Therefore  the phenomenon of perishing away of mental ***dhammas*** only should be continued to discern for that  meditator.  Discerning  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  must  be  discerned  by  succeeding ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge again. For a meditator with vehicle of pure ***vipassanā*** practice, the phenomenon of perishing away of mental ***dhammas*** of wholesome impulsions of mind-door- cognitive processes is usually the most convenient one and the character of non-self (***anatta***) has to be discerned continuously in order to transfer into the field of Unconditioned Element called ***nibbāna;*** he has to try again by ways of discernments called corporeal septet (***rūpa sattaka***) and non-corporeal septet (***arūpa sattaka***). He has to endeavour in order to attain powerful ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge in sequence. If he endeavours continuously in this way, the stage of knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations will be occurred with great efficiency again. When five kinds of controlling faculties called ***saddhā, vīriya, sati, samādhi, paññ***ā, becomes  matured  gradually,  he  can  transfer  into  the  field  of  Unconditioned  Element, ***nibbāna***. 

Here  it  will  be  presented  on  the  '***Yoking  Method  (yuganaddha  naya)***'  found  in ***Yuganaddha Sutta, Anguttara Nikāya-1-475***, as follows. \_\_\_\_ 

17. ***Yuganaddha Sutta (Ang-1-475)*** 

`       `***Pāli Quotation (Ang-1-475,476- 6 paragraph)*** 

* ***paragraph 2*** tNyD;rSm ***PAGE 367*** ½kduf&ef

Thus  …  I've  heard.  Once  upon  a  time,  the  most  ***Venerable***  Ā***nadā***  stayed  in ***Gositārāma*** Monastery, ***Kosamb***ī Division.At that time the most ***Venerable*** Ā***nadā*** called surrounding bhikkhus… that "Ā***vuso.. bhikkhus***" …  

Associating bhikkhus replied respectfully ***Venerable*** Ā***nadā*** that "***bhante***". The most ***Venerable*** Ā***nadā*** gave this preaching.\_\_\_ 

"*** Ā***vuso*** … any male bhikkhu or female bhikkhu (***bjikkhun***ī) asked me about his or her  attainment  of  arahatship.  All  those  male  and  female  bhikkhus  asked  about  their attainment of arahatship through four kinds of Paths or nay one kind of four Paths. Which kinds are \_\_\_\_ 

1. Ā***vuso*** … in this Noble admonishment of the Buddha… the bhikkhu develops ***vipassanā*** practice  which  is  led  by  samatha  practice  beforehand.  For  that  bhikhu  who  develops ***vipassanā*** practice which is led by samatha practice beforehand, the Path of Upstreamenterer (***sotāpattimagga***) occurs obviously. In the next method\_\_\_\_ Mundane ***vipassanā*** path called ***pubbabhāga  satipa***ţţ***hāna  magga***  occurs  obviously.  That  bhikkhu  approaches,  develops, performs advancement of that path over and over again. For that bhikkhu who approaches, develops, performs advancement of that path over and over again, fetters (***samyo jana***) are finished off removed; underlying tendencies (***anusaya***) are disappeared and extinguished. ***(Ang-1-475)*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Ang-A-2-436)*** 

**PAGE-368** 

***Pāli Quotation (Ang-***ţī***-344, M-A-1-112)*** 

These words, ***samatha pubbangamam vipassanā*** ***bhāveti***, are preached by means of the person with vehicle of ***samatha***. It is right.\_\_\_\_ That person with vehicle of ***samatha*** accomplishes either access concentration or full concentration firstly. This concentration is ***samatha***  practice.  That  person  with  vehicle  of  ***samatha***  performs  ***vipassanā***  practice  by discerning on either that access concentration or full concentration and associating mental ***dhammas***, as ***anicca*** etc. This way of discernment is ***vipassanā*** practice. Therefore these words, "***samatha pubbangamam vipassanam bhāveti = vipassanā*** practice, which is led by ***samatha*** practice beforehand, is developed"…, are preached. ***(Ang-A-2-346, Ang-***ţī***-2-344)***. This  way  of  explanation  is  shown  with  the  intention  that  "generally,  those  persons  with vehicle of ***samatha*** usually takes to heart ***vipassanā*** by discerning on the mental ***dhammas***, among which mental ***dhammas*** of absorption are discerned as priority". ***(M-*** ţī***-1-204)*** 

In the word, "***maggo*** ***sañjāyati =*** the Path occurs obviously", it is obvious occurrence of the first supramundane Path = Path of Upstream-enterer (***sotāpattimagga***) indeed. Due to occurrence of only one mind moment of that Path of Upstream-enterer as natural fixed law, it can not be developed to many others. However, if the second Path = the path of Once- returnee etc can be performed, it can be said that Path of Upstream-enterer is approached, developed, performed for advancement of it over and over again.(***Ang-A-2-346***)  

The next method\_\_\_ It should be recognized on the meaning of this Pali Text by means of mundane path = path of ***vipassanā called ***pubbabhāga satipa***ţţ***hāna magga***.How it can be recognizes?\_\_\_\_ The words, "***maggo*** ***sañjāyati*** = the path occurs obviously" means the mundane path of  ***vipassanā***, which is just anterior to the Noble Path, arises beforehand. It means in this way. (***Ang-***ţī***-2-344***)***     

The word, "ā***sevati*** =approach', means it approaches by means of contemplation of disenchantment (***nibbidānupassan***ā).The words, ***bhāveti*** = develop', means it develops by means  of  knowledge  of  Desire  for  Deliverance.  The  word,  "***bahulīkaroti***  =  performs advancement of path over and over again" means it performs advancement of path over and over again by means of the knowledge of Reflection (***pa***ţ***isaṅkhānupassanāñ***āṇ***a***). (=If  the knowledge of Disenchantment  is reached, it can be said mundane path of ***Vipassanā*** is approaches. If the knowledge of Desire for Deliverance is reached, it can be said mundane path of ***Vipassanā*** is developed. If the knowledge of Reflection is reached, it can be said mundane path of ***Vipassanā*** is performed for advancement of path over and over again). (***Ang-***ţī***-2-344***) 

**PAGE-369** 

The  next  method\_\_\_\_  If  these  kinds  of  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  Terror,  the knowledge of Danger, the knowledge of Disenchantment are reached, it can be said mundane path of ***Vipassanā*** is approached. If these kinds of knowledge, the knowledge of Desire for Deliverance, the knowledge of Reflection, the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations, are  reached,  it  can  be  said  mundane  path  of  ***vipassanā  is  developed.  If  the  ***Vipassanā Knowledge  leading  to  Emerging  (***vu***ţţ***hānagāmini***  ***vipassanā)***  is  reached,  it  can  be  said mundane path  ***vipassanā*** is performed for advancement of path over and over again. (***Ang-***ţī***- 2-344***) (Explanation of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge leading to Emerging will be seen later.) 

This is the first kind of person. About the second kinds of person will be continued as follows. 

2. Ā***vuso***  …  as  a  next  kind,  the  ***bhikkhu***  develop  ***samatha***  practice,  which  is  led  by ***Vipassanā*** practice before hand. For that ***bhikkhu*** who develops ***samatha*** practice, which is led by the ***Vipassanā*** practice before hand, the path of Upstream-enterer or the mundane path of ***Vipassanā*** , occurs obviously. That ***bhikkhu*** approaches, develops, performs advancement of  that  path  over  and  over  again.  For  that ***bhikkhu***  who  approaches,  develops,  performs advancement  of  that  path  over  and  over  again,  fetters  (***samyojana***)  are  finished  off  = removed; underlying tendencies (***anusaya***) are disappeared and extinguished. (***Aṅg-1-475***)  ***Pāli Quotation (Aṅg-A-2-346) (Ang-***ţī***-2-344***) 

This second kind of person is the person with vehicle of pure ***vipassanā*** practice. That person  with  vehicle  of  pure  ***vipassanā***  practice  by  discerning  on  aggregates  of  fivefold clinging  to  existence  (***pañcupādānakkhandh***ā)  as  ***anicca***  beforehand,  without  fulfilling ***samatha***  practice  with  two  kinds  of  concentration  called  access  concentration  and  full concentration.  Thus  ***vipassanā***  practice  is  accomplished  beforehand  and  then  ***samatha*** practice is developed. It means that the person who attains ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge naturally can give rise to concentration by standing on ***vipassanā*** practice. In the continuum of that kind of  ***bhikkhu***…. the Noble Path can occur obviously. (***Aṅg-A-2-346, Ang-***ţī***-2-344***)  

After reading on above explanations of commentary and sub commentary it should not be misunderstood that the person with vehicle of pure ***vipassanā*** practice never develop concentration  completely.  They,  actually,  never  develop  real  access  concentration,  which occurs  adjacent  to  absorption,  and  full  concentration  of  absorption  only.  A  kind  of concentration which is called access concentration as metaphorical usage of ***sadisūpacāra*** (= the  same  degree  of  concentration),  or  which  is  called  momentary  concentration (***hka***ṇ***ikasamādhi***)  as  direct  usage,  must  be  developed  through  four  elements  meditation method, for every person with vehicle of ***vipassanā*** practice. It is inevitable obligation for that kind of meditator. It should be real the following exegeses found in commentary and subcommentary. 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-113)*** 

**PAGE-370** 

***Pāli Quotation (M-***ţī***-1-204)*** 

In this Noble admonishment of the Buddha, the person with vehicle of pure ***vipassanā*** performs ***vipassanā*** practice by generalizing on factors of fivefold clinging to existence, as ***anicca***  etc.,  without  fulfilling  only  ***samatha***  practice  called  two  kinds  of  concentration  , access  concentration  and  full  concentration.  This  is  called  ***vipassanā***  practice.  Due  to completion of matured ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge in the continuum of that meditator, ***vipassanā*** practice leading to Emerging, which enters rapidly into ***nibbāna*** after emerging from object of conditioned things, occurs consequently. That ***vipassanā*** practice 58 leading to emerging includes the Noble Path ***dhammas***. Factors of the Noble Path ***dhammas, sammād***ţţ***hi*** etc., which occur at the Noble Path (-moment), take the object of ***nibbāna***. Among those factors of object of the Noble Path of ***dhammas, sammāsamāthi*** called one-pointedness (***cite kaggat***ā) also  includes.  That  concentration  called  one-pointedness  arises  by  taking  the  object  of ***nibbāna***. In this case, one-pointedness means the nature of the mind falls on the object of ***nibbāna*** uniquely. This concentration of the Noble Path (***magga samādhi***) is called ***samatha*** indeed. Therefore, it explained that ***samatha*** practice which is led by ***vipassanā*** practice, is developed. ***(M-A-1-113)*** 

In above explanation, "the person with vehicle of pure ***vipassanā*** without fulfilling only  ***samatha***  practice",  is  applied  with  the  word,  "only",  which  has  the  meaning disagreement. With regarding to that word, 'only', the real access concentration which usually occurs adjacent to absorption is rejected but momentary concentration is not rejected. The momentary  concentration,  which  is  called  ***upacāra  samādhi***  by  metaphorical  usage, ***sadisūpacāra***, which is called ***kha***ṇ***ikasamādhi*** by direct usage, actually, is not rejected. This because  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  never  occur  without  momentary  concentration  called ***kha***ṇ***ikasamādhi. (M-***ţī***-1-204)*** 

The  meaning  of  ***kha***ṇ***ikasamādhi***  has  been  explained  in  detail  in  Section  2,  the concentration should be developed, Volume I. 

The following third kind of person is a *bhikkhu* who performs the yoking method (***yuganaddha naya***). As two bulls are yoking together, that *bhikkhu* performs the yoking method of ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practice. 

**PAGE-371** 

3. Ā***vuso***  …,  the  next  kind,  the  *bhikkhu*  who  performs  ***samatha***  and  ***vipassaā***  performs ***samatha***  and  ***vipassanā***  practices  practices  by  yoking  together.  For  that  *bhikkhu*  who performs ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practice by yoking together, the path (= the Noble Path of Upstream-entereror  mundane path of ***vipassanā***) occurs obviously. That *bhikkhu* approaches, develops, performs advancement of that path over and over again. For that *bhikkhu* who approaches, develops, performs advancement of that path, fetters (***samyojana***) are finished off = removed; underlying tendencies (***anusaya***) are disappeared and extinguished. ***(Aṅg-1- 475)*** 

***Pāli Quotation (M-***ţī***-1-204)*** 

The  phrase,  ***yuganaddham  bhāveti***,  means  ***samatha***  and  ***vipassanā***  practices  are developed by yoking together. During developing in that way, the absorption is entered by that  consciousness  and  then  it  is  impossible  to  generalize  on  conditioned  things  by  that consciousness only. This practicing *bhikkhu* enters such kinds of absorptions and then he discerned on that kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of absorptions as object of ***vipassanā*** practice. Such kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of absorptions are discerned as object of ***vipassanā*** practice and then that kinds of absorptions are entered again. How it will be developed? \_\_\_\_ The first absorption is entered.  After emerging from that absorption, conditioned things (= mental ***dhammas*** of the first absorption are discerned as objects of  ***Vipassanā practice. Afterwards the second absorption is entered. After emerging from that second absorption, conditioned things  of  second  absorption  (=mental  ***dhammas***  of  second  absorption)  are  discerned  as objects of ***Vipassanā practice again. Afterwards the third absorption is …R… Afterwards the absorption  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  is  entered.  After  emerging  from  that absorption conditioned things (=mental ***dhammas)*** of absorption of neither-perception-nor- non-perception are discerned as ***Vipassanā practice, as a whole. This way of developing can be said that this *bhikkhu* develops ***samatha*** and ***Vipassanā practice by yoking together, called yoking method (***yuganaddhanaya).(Ang-A-2-346***)******    

This way of discernment called yoking method can be misunderstood for common people who  have  not  got  any  absorption.  It  is  only  the  performance  which  can  be  achieved  by meditators with ability to enter various kinds of absorptions and ability to perform ***Vipassanā practice discerning on mental ***dhammas***  of those absorptions really. Then it should be read the fourth   kinds of person as follows.\_\_\_\_ 

4. Ā***vuso*** … the next kind, for a *bhikkhu*, the consciousness, which is influenced by unrest of ***dhammas (dhammuddhacca),*** occurs especially. Āvuso… for such time, that consciousness of ***Vipassanā practice stands **PAGE-372** well on the object of ***nibbaāa (gocarajjhatta***) only. It absorbs well, it concentrates well the mind can be put well on that internal pasture called object. At that time, for that *bhikkhu*, the path (= the Path of Upstreamenterer or mundane path  of  ***Vipassan***ā)  occurs  obviously.  That  *bhikkhu*  approaches,  develops,  performs advancement of that path over and over again. For that *bhikkhu* who approaches, develops, performs advancement of that path over and over again, fetters  (***samyojana***) are finished off 
- removed, underlying tendencies (***anusaya***) are disappeared and extinguished. 

“Ā***vuso***… any male *bhikkhu* or female *bhikkhu* (***bhikkhun***ī)  asked me about his or her attainment of arahatship. All those male and female *bhikkhus* asked about their attainment of arahatship through four kinds of Paths or any one kind of four paths, “said by Venerable ***Anandā. (Aṅg-1-475-476***)  

***Pāli Quotation   (Aṅg-A-2-346)*** 

***(Aṅg-ti-2-344***)  

During developing ***samatha*** and ***Vipassanā practice, those defilements ***dhammas*** light etc, occurs  obviously  and  then  the  mind  of  meditation  which  occurs  by  obsessing  on  those defilements, light etc, is called unrest of ***dhammas*** (***dhammuddhacca***) which wanders from original object of ***Vipassanā practice. The mind influenced by that unrest of ***dhammas*** is the consciousness called ***dhammuddhacca viggahita manasa***. Conditioned things are taken into heart as ***anicca*** (***dukkha, anatta***). When light etc, appear, during practicing in that way, those light etc, are taken into heart as Noble  ***dhammas*** resulting in deviation of mind of meditation from original object of ***Vipassanā practice. At that time, conditioned things can not be known and seen through ***anicca*** (***dukkha, anatta)*** as they really are. However, when seven kinds of favourable  conditions  (***sappāya***)  are  available,  after  overcoming  on  those  defilements ***dhammas***, the mind of meditation reaches on to right path of ***Vipassanā practice again. When he continues to perform the advancement of path, after overcoming the path of ***Vipassanā practice,  the  mind  stands  well  on  the  object  of  ***nibbāna  called  gocarajjhatta  (internal pasture) (Aṅg-A-2-346,347***)  

18. ***disākāka-navigating crow Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-294,295)*** 

If that knowledge of Neurality Towards Formations sees desthless element, ***nibbāna*** which is total happiness through quiescent nature, it enters into ***nibbāna*** after abandoning on arising of all kinds of conditioned things (***sankhārapavatta***) (***Vs-2-294-294***)  

**PAGE-373** 

Due to completion of the knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations with sharp, clear and powerful efficiency, which is discerning on the object of phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things, it becomes matured condition. Due to reaching into matured condition, it becomes the basis of the knowledge of Adaptation (***anulomañ***āṇ***a***) which is adaptable to arise the Noble Path-knowledge, resulting in seeing ***nibbāna*** through the nature of quiescence. It can be said that knowledge enters into ***nibbāna*** rapidly after abandoning of ***saṅkhārapavatta*** called arising of conditioned things. In this stage it should be recognized the fact that above knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations, knowledge of Adaptation and knowledge  of  Trans-lineage  (***gotraphuñ***āṇ***a***)  are  termed  commonly  as  the  knowledge  of Neutrality Towards Formations by means of metaphorical usage called ***ekatta naya*** (unique method).( ***Mah***āţī***-2-459-460***) 

Unless  ***nibbāna***  can  be  seen,  the  knowledged  of  Neutrality  Towards  Formations  is  not matured for that period with inability to see ***nibbāna***   and  vice versa.  If it is so, that knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards  Formations  occurs  continuously  with  the  object  of conditioned things over and over again. The knowledge discerns the phenomena of perishing away of both conditioned things and discerning knowledge over and over again. It should be recognized on that knowledge as navigating crow of sailors who travel on the ocean in olden days. (***Vs-2-294,295***) 

In olden days sailors who travel on the ocean usually take navigating crow that can search right direction. When the ship leads to wrong direction due to storm, shores are out of sight of sailors. At that time they release navigating crow in order to search right direction. That crow flies into sky from topmast of the ship in order to search nearest shore through all directions. If that crow sees any shore in one direction, it flies straight through to that shore. Unless any shore can be found, the crow comes back to ship and perches on topmast again. 

Similarly,  if  the  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards  Formations  sees  the  deathless element, ***nibbāna*** where all kinds of worries are extinguished, it enters into ***nibbāna*** rapidly after  abandoning  on  the  arising  of  conditioned  things.  Unless ***nibbāna*** is  seen,  it  occurs continuously with the object of conditioned things (***Vs-2-295***) 

AS the dough which is swirled on the round bamboo tray or as cotton oilcake which is dressed  frequently  by  a  cotton-dressing-bow,  that  knowledge  of  Neutrality  Towards Formations  distinguishes  and  keep  in  mind  conditioned  things  by  means  of  various discernments and then it abandons two extremities called terror and pleasingness. Due to reaching  in  thr  apex  of  reasoning  on  **PAGE-374**  conditioned  things  as  ***anicca,  dukkha, anatta***, it stands on the object of  phenomenon of perishing away of conditioned things by means  of  three  kinds  of  contemplations,  ***aniccānupassanā,  dukkhānupassanā, anattānupassanā after neutralizing on the function of reasoning as ***anicca, dukkha, anatta***. The knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations with this situation\_\_\_\_ 

1.reaches into occurrence of three kinds of ***vimokkhamukha*** (bases of emancipation) and  2.occurs as the fundamental factor of discriminating on (7) kinds of Noble-Ones. 

19. ***Three kinds of*** ***vimokkhamukha ( basses of emancipation)***  

***Pāli Quotation (Pa***ţ***isam-254-Vs-2-296***) 

A(1) ***aniccānupassanā***  = ***animittavimokkha***  

After  distinguishing  between  the  arising  phase  and  perishing  phase  by  means  of phenomena of arising and perishing away of conditioned things, it is discerned as ***anicca***. This is called the knowledge of Contemplation of  Impermanence  (***aniccānupassanā*** ***ñ***āṇ***a).*** That knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations reasoned on conditioned things that “***udayato pubbe  saṅkhārā*** ***natthi=***  there are no conditioned things before arising” and then traces the destination of those conditioned things and concludes that “***vayato param na gacchanti, ettheva antaradhāyanti =*** after perishing away, conditioned things never go on, they disappear just the perishing phase only”. For that practicing meditator who takes into heart conditioned things as ***anicca***, conditioned things appear through the nature of finishing off,  destruction,  consequently  resulting  in  improvement  of  controlling  faculty  of  faith (***adhimokkha  bahula***).  Emancipation  (***vimokkha***)  called  ***animitta***,  which  is  void  of phenomenon of conditioned things, can be accomplished (***Vs-2-295,296***)      

When the knowledge of Contemplation of Impermanence is matured with completion of  Controlling  faculties  after  attaining  supporting  factors  of  efficiency  of  relation  of determinative dependence (***upanissayapaccaya***) of knowledge of Contemplation of suffering (***dukkhānupassanā*** ***ñ***āṇ***a***) and knowledge of Contemplation of Non-self (***anattānupassanā*** ***ñ***āṇ***a***),  the  Noble  Path  ***dhamma***  arises  by  taking  the  object  of ***nibban***ā,  which  is  called ***animitta***  due  to  voidness  of  phenomenon  of  conditioned  things,  through  the  nature  of voidness of phenomenon of conditioned things. Due to arising by taking object of ***nibbanā*** called  ***animitta***  as  object,  that  Noble  Path-knowledge  is  also  called  “***animitta”***.  Due  to emancipation from defilements, it is also called “***vimokkha***”. Due to occurrence of bases of emancipation from three realms called world of beings, it is also called “***mukha***”. 

During  endeavouring  ***vipassanā***  practice  by  means  of  the  knowledge  of Contemplation  of  Impermanence,  the  practicing  meditator,  therefore,  joins  “***Vipassanā***  leading to Emerging” with the Noble Path through taking into heart the nature of voidness of phenomenon  of  conditioned  thing  (***animitta)***  that  “in  such  ***nibban***ā,  this  phenomenon  of conditioned things is totally absent and **PAGE-375** it is called ***animitta***”. That kind of Noble Path  of  that  meditator  can  be  designated  as  not  only  ***“animitta  vimokkha”***  but  also ***“animittavimokkhamukha”***. It can be said that Noble Path faces with ***nibbanā*** through the nature of voidness of phenomenon of conditioned things (***animitta)***. (***Pa***ţ***isam-244,254,Vs-2- 295,296***)  

The  nature  of  voidness  of  phenomenon  of  conditioned  things  of  ***nibbanā***  is  not performed by neither the noble Path nor knowledge of ***Vipassanā*** practice but it is achieved naturally. The Noble ***dhamma*** called ***nibbanā*** is the Unconditioned Element which is not worth providing by any kind of casual ***dhamma***. Due to presence of object of that  ***nibbanā, animmitta,*** the Noble Path can be designated  as ***animmitta*** (voidness of phenomenon of conditioned things).(***Vs-2-296***)  

**A(2) How controlling faculty of faith is predominant** 

While the meditator performs ***vipassanā*** practice by discerning on conditioned things as three general characters alternatively, the Knowledge of Contemplation of Impermanence, especially becomes sharp and brave. At that time in the continuum of that meditator, the controlling faculty of faith becomes predominant. It is right.\_\_\_\_ After practising with only faith that... "conditioned things are impermanence", at the beginning stage, when ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge  reaches  into  apex  condition,  the  occurrence  of  impermanence  of  conditioned things, pure octads with eighth factor nutriment ***(oja***ţţ***hamakarūpa)*** consisting in ruby, gold et., are known and seen by penetrative knowledge as impermanent occurrence of pure octads with  eighth  factor  nutriment  of  non-living  external  world,  fine  leaf  etc.,  are  seen  by knowledge. 

[Note \_\_\_\_ In the way of discernment of corporeal septet (***rūpasattaka naya***), the meditator should remember on the section of discernment on natural corporeality (***dhammata rūpa***). 

When  four  great  elements  consisting  in  both  fine  leaves  and  ruby,  gold  etc.,  are discerned by ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge with the help of light produced y concentration, masses of  corporealities  called  pure  octads  with  eighth  factor  nutriment,  which  are  produced  by temperature,  can  be  seen  obviously.  It  means  that  when  the  meditator  discerns  those conditioned things with the help of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge, only the nature of impermanence of those conditioned things are seen significantly by ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge.]  

In the continuum of that practising meditator who knows and sees penetratively on the nature of impermanence of conditioned things in that way the firm faith on the Buddha in a way that "***sammāsambuddho vata so bhagavā*** = that supreme Buddha is the real Enlightened One  who  knows  exactly  on  five  kinds  of  ***ññeyya  dhammas***  clled  ***saṅkhāra,  vikkāra, lakkha***ṇ***a,  nibbāna,  paññatti***,  which  are  worth  knowing,  really...",  occurs  obviously. Therefore that practising meditator has fulfilled with predominant faith consequently. **PAGE-376** 

Consciousness of ***vipassanā*** practice called ***adhicitta*** (exceeding consciousness) of meditator with predominance in firm faith, is ready to enter the Unconditioned Element called ***animitta*** after improving in to successive ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge, the knowledge of Adaptation etc. Therefore  the  Noble  Path-Knowledge  which  occurs  at  the  end  of  that  knowledge  of Contemplation of Impermanence is designated as ***animitta vimokkhamukha. (Mah***āţī ***-2- 461,462)*** 

2. ***dukkhānupassanā*** ***=  appa***ṇ***ithitavimokkha*** 

While conditioned things are generalized by three characters alternatively, the nature of suffering is discerned as priority due to presence of excessive appearance of nature of suffering. The knowledge of Contemplation of suffering of that practicing meditator shows clearly real nature of suffering of conditioned things. Due to showing in that way, the mind of meditation of meditator becomes dreadful and it occurs through the nature of terror The mind of meditation with the knowledge of Contemplation on Suffering which is frightened by showing  real  nature  of  suffering  which  is  very  terrible  due  to  presence  of  perpetual destruction and breaking down of conditioned things, sharpens the mind on the right way of practice.  Therefore  the  mind  of  meditation  with  the  knowledge  of  Contemplation  on Suffering is the factor of dreadfulness of the mind and sharpening of the mind on the right way of practice indeed. 

Furthermore,  due  to  taking  into  heart  the  occurrence  of  peacefulness,  superiority, happiness  of  ***nibbāna***  through  reasoning  in  a  way  that  "conditioned  things  are  suffering really,  in  the  opposite  aspect  of  those  conditioned  things,  the  Noble  ***dhammas***  called ***nibbāna***, where conditioned tings are totally ceased, is happiness indeed", the mind of that meditator is usually predominated with tranquility (***passaddhi bahula***) due to continuous associating with pleasurable interest (***pīti***). 

Due to predominance with tranquility in that way, controlling faculty of concentration is available resulting in keeping away from selfish desire, anger, delusion on conditioned things. Due to occurrence of far from selfish-desire (***rāgapa***ṇ***idhi***) etc., that knowledge of Contemplation of Suffering occurs the fundamental factor of attainment of the Noble Path- Knowledge called ***appa***ṇ***ihitavimokkha (emancipation through non-heartfelt desire).*** 

While the practising meditator is performing ***vipassanā*** practice by taking into heart as the nature of suffering of conditioned things, the knowledge of Contemplation of Suffering performs occurrence of away from selfish-desire (***rāgapa***ṇ***idhi***) etc., resulting in inclination towards  ***nibbāna***  where  is  voidness  of  selfish-desire  and  then  it  joins  the  knowledge  of ***Vipassanā*** leading to Emerging with the Noble Path-Knowledge. Due to occurrence of that Noble Path-Knowledge through taking the object of ***nibbanā*** as the nature of voidness of selfish-desire etc., it is called "***appa***ṇ***ihita***". Due to emancipation from respective defilements, it is called "***vimokkha***". Due to occurrence of basis of emancipation from three realms called world of beings, it is also called  "***mukha***". That **PAGE-377** kind of  Noble Path of that meditator can, therefore, be designed as not only "***appa***ṇ***ihitavimokkha***" but also "***appa***ṇ***ihita vimokkha mukha***". ***(Vs-2-295,296, Mah***āţī ***-2-462)***  

3. ***anattānupassanā*** ***= suññatavimokkha*** 

While  the  practising  meditator  keeps  in  mind  conditioned  things  and  performs ***vipassanā*** practice by alternative discerning on three general characters, the contemplation on non-self  is  carried  out  continuously,  due  to  presence  of  efficiency  of  Knowledge  of Contemplation on non-self. Due to efficiency of that knowledge of Contemplation on Non- self, the mind of meditation is free from wrong obsession that “***atta*** (=self) is present”. The knowledge of Contemplation on Non-self accomplishes the mind of meditation to keep apart from obsession of ‘***atta***’ resulting in appearance of conditioned things as nothingness in the insight. Due to occurrence of subtle object of  that nature of nothingness, the controlling faculty of wisdom is predominant in the continuum of the meditator who develops knowledge of Completion of Non-self consequently. (In this case, the controlling faculty of wisdom (***paññindriya***) means penetrative knowing and seeing on the nature of impermanence, the nature  of  suffering,  especially,  the  nature  of  non-self.)  Due  to  presence  of  predominated controlling  faculty  of  wisdom  in  that  way,  delusion  =  ignorance  is  far  from  insight  of meditator.  Due  to  occurrence  of  very  far  from  delusion  =  ignorance,  the  meditator  who develops Knowledge of Contemplation on Non-self can obtain the Noble Path-Knowledge called ***suññata vimokkha*** at the end of Knowledge of Contemplation on Non-self. 

Due  to  ability  to  keep  away  from  obsession  of  ***atta***  through  the  efficiency  of Knowledge of Contemplation of Non-self, the mind of meditation of meditator is void of ***atta,*** resulting in joining the Knowledge of ***Vipassanā*** practice called ***Vu***ţţ***hānagāmini***, with the Noble Path-Knowledge after inclining towards the Unconditioned Element, ***nibbāna*** which is worth  designating  as  nothingness  (***suññata***).  This  can  be  said  that  the  mind  enters  into Nothingness Element (***suññatadhātu***), due to discerning on conditioned things as strangeness (***para***). 

It should be recognized that "due to arising of the  Path-Knowledge through taking object  of ***nibbāna***  as the  nature  of  nothingness  which  is  void  of  '***atta***',  that  Noble  Path- Knowledge is called "***suññata***". Due to emancipation from respective defilements, that Noble Path-Knowledge is also called '***vimokkha***'. Due to occurrence of basis of emancipation from three realms called world of beings, it is also called '***mukha***'. That kind of Noble Path of that meditator  can,  therefore,  be  designated  as  not  only  ***suññatavimokkha***  but  also ***Suññatavimookkha mukha. (Vs-2-295,296, Mah***āţī ***-2-462)*** 

**PAGE-378** 

20. **Definitely (*mukhya*) and indirectly (*pariyāya*)** 

In the Pāli Text of ***Dhammasanga***ṇī ***(abhi-1-84,85)***, the Buddha preached on two kinds of "***vimommha***", viz, ***appa***ṇ***ihitavimokkha*** and ***suññatavimookkha*** only. That kind of preaching is preached definitely, due to occurrence of preaching on the ultimate nature of ***dhamma (paramattha)***. 

In some Sutta, the Pāli Text of ***Pa***ţ***isambhidā*** ***Magga (Pa***ţ***isam-262, 263)*** etc., three kinds of ***vimookkha***, viz, ***suññatavimookkha, animitta vimokkha, appa***ṇ***ithitavimokha,*** are preached indirectly through ***suttanta*** method. 

The Noble Path-Kowledge is designated by those names of ***vimokkha*** through only the nature how the Noble Path-Knowledge is reached. 

The Knowledge of Contemplation of impermanence abandons emblem of permanence (***nicca nimitta***) temporarily during ***vipassanā*** practice, but forever during the Noble Path (- moment),  while  the  Knowledge  of  Contemplation  of  Suffering  abandons  emblem  of happiness (***sukkha nimitta***) temporarily during ***vipassanā*** practice, but forever during the Noble Path(-moment), the Knowledge of Contemplation of Non-self abandons emblem of self (***atta nimitta***) temporarily during ***viapassanā*** practice, but forever during the Noble Path (-moment).  Due  to  free  from  those  emblems  these  three  kinds  of  Contemplations  are, therefore, termed a  ***animitta vimokkha***, really- 

However  the  Noble  ***dhamma,  nibbāna***,  which  is  the  object  of  the  Noble  Path- Knowledge is actually ***animitta dhamma***, due to total voidness of any kind of ***saṅkhāra nimitta***  (phenomenon  of  conditioned  things).  Above  three  kinds  of  contemplation ***aniccānupassanā*** etc., are not emancipating from ***saṅkhāra nimitta***, due to occurrence of taking objects of ***saṅkhāra dhammas*** asobject, actually. 

* ***animittañca bhāvehi, mānānusaya mujjaha. (Khu-1-329)*** 

In various ***Sutta, Vijaya Sutta*** etc., the Buddha preached that "***anmittā*** ***nupassanā*** (contemplation on voidness of emblem) must be developed, underlying tendency of conceit must  be  removed".  Although  that  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  removes  those  wmblems, ***nicca nimitta,  dhuva  nimitta,  sukkha  nimitta,  atta  nimitta***,  it  is  the  ***dhamma***  with  ***saṅkhāra nimitta***  (phenomenon  of  conditioned  things),  due  to  occurrence  of  taking  objects  of phenomenon  of  conditioned  things  by  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge,  itself.  Due  to  inability  to abandon ***saṅkhāra nimitta*** forever, it can not be designated as ***animitta*** definitely, but it can be designated as ***animitta*** indirectly, due to temporary voidness of those emblems, ***nicca nimitta,  dhuva  nimitta,  sukkha  nimitta,  atta  nimitta***.  That  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  is designated as not only '***suññata***' but also '***appa***ṇ***ihita***' definitely. Those names of ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge are preached as "***vimokkha***" at the Noble Path (-moment) by means of the way of practice leading to the Noble Path only. Due to preaching in that way, it should be recognized the fact that "only two kinds of ***vimokkha***, viz, ***apa***ṇ***ihita vimokkha*** and ***suññata vimokkha*** are preached in the preaching of ***Abhidhamma. (Vs-2-296,297, Mah***āţī ***-2-462,463)*** 

The next method \_\_\_\_ The preaching of ***Abhidhamma*** is a kind of preaching that preaches the meaning with ultimate truth. The Noble Path called ***animitta*** is also deficient in validity in the aspect of ultimate sense. 

**PAGE-379** 

The name, ***animitta vimkkha*** is preached in the Pāli Text of ***Pa***ţ***isambhidā*** ***Magga*** by means  of   ***aniccānupassan***ā.  The  Noble  Path  called  ***animitta  vimokkha***  which  occurs through that contemplation on impermanence is predominated with controlling faculty of faith, called ***saddhindriya***. That controlling faculty of faith, actually, is not any factor which belongs to Noble Eightfold Path. Due to occurrence of out of factors of Path of controlling faculty of faith itself, it is unable to give the name the Noble Path which is result of it really. 

In those kinds of ***vimokkha***, other than this ***animitta vimokkha, appa***ṇ***ihita vimokha***, is preached by means of contemplation on suffering, while ***suññata vimokkha*** is preached by means of contemplation on Non-self. In those two kinds of ***vimokkha***, the controlling faculty of concentration is predominated by ***appa***ṇ***nihita vimokkha***, while the controlling faculty of wisdom  is  predominated  by  ***suññata  vimokkha.***  Those  kinds  of  controlling  faculties  are factors of the Noble Path, which belong to Noble Eightfold Path. Due to occurrence of factors of Noble Path in that way, these are able to give the name of Noble Path ***dhamma***, which are results of theirs. 

It should be recognized the fact that due to inability to give the name for the Noble Path by standing on it route of itself, the Path called ***animitta*** is not worth preaching in the Pāli Text of ***Dhammasna***ṇī***, Abhidhamma. (see Vs-295,297, Abhi-A-1-267,269; Mah***āţī ***-2- 462,463)*** 

21. **How designation as *suññata* (nothingness) is available** 

In this case, the term, ***suññata*** (nothingness) is the name of Supra-mundane Path ***dhamma***. Due to presence of these three kinds of bases, viz, 

1. ***āgamana = vipassanā*** which is a trace to give rise to the Noble Path, 
2. ***sagu***ṇ***a*** = quality of the Noble Path itself, 
2. ***āramma***ṇ***a*** = object =  ***nibban***ā, 

that Supramundane Path has got designation as ***suññata*** (nothingness). How designation as ***suññata*** is available is as follws. \_\_\_\_ 

In  this  Noble  admonishment,  the  practicing  meditator  always  takes  into  heart conditioned tings through the nature of non-self and discerns as ***anatta*** over and over again. However, only the way of discerning as non-self on conditioned things can not give rise to the Noble Path which is called ***vu***ţţ***hāna*** (= emerging), due to ability to enter into ***nibbāna*** rapidly after emerging from both conditioned things and suffering of cyclic ***dhammas***. Ways of discerning as both ***anicca*** (through impermanence) and ***dukkha*** (through suffering) are appropriate ones for occurrence of Noble Path. Therefore the mind is applied to reach into three kinds of contemplations, ***anicca,* PAGE-380  *dukkha, anatta***, alternatively. However, ***Vipassanā***  practice  leading  to  emerging  of  that  meditator  discerns  all  conditioned  things occurring in three  realms as nothingness  (***suññata***) (= voidness from ***atta***). This kind of ***vipassanā*** practice is called ***suññata vipassanā*** or ***suññatānupassanā.*** (Due to depending upon ***anattānupassanā*** previously, it means that at the moment of ***vipassanā*** practice leading to emerging which is ajacent to the Noble Path must be ***anattānupassanā*** which is capable of discerning  on  conditioned  things  as  ***suññata***  (nothingness).  That  ***vipassanā***   85  practice leading  to  emerging  designates  the  Noble  Path  of  itself  as ***suññata***  through  standing  on practice which is the basis of occurrence of the Noble Path. Thus the  Supra-mundane Noble Path has got designation as ***suññata*** (nothingness), due to kind of ***vipassanā*** practice which is trace of occurrence of the Path (***vipassanāgamana***). 

In  the  next  method  \_\_\_\_  The  Noble  Path  is  voidness  from  selfish-desire,  anger, delusion. The occurrence of voidness from selfish-desire, anger, delusion that way is the nobility  of the Noble Path. Due to presence of that nobility of voidness from selfish-desire, anger, delusion of itself, the Noble Path has got designation as ***suññata***. 

Furthermore, due to voidness from selfish desire etc., the Noble ***dhammas***, ***nibbāna*** is also worth designating as ***suññata.*** Due to occurrence of way of arising by taking that object of ***nibbāna*** called ***suññata*** as object, the Noble Path has got designation as ***suññata.*** 

Among those three kinds of bases for designation as ***suññata***, in the aspect of indirect discourse of ***suññata,*** the Noble Path has got designation as ***suññata*** through nobility of itself and  object.  It  is  right.\_\_\_\_  This  preaching  methodology  of  ***suññata***  is  indirect  way  of preaching indeed. The preaching methodology of ***Abhidhamma***, on the other hand, is not indirect way of preaching but definite one actually. In the aspect of ***Abhidhamma***, it can not, therefore, be designated as ***suññata*** through either nobility or object but ***vipassanā*** ***gamana*** (***vipassanā*** practice which is a cause to give rise to the Noble Path) only. It is right. \_\_\_\_ Only ***āgamana*** (= a trace to give rise to the Noble Path) is a significant factor. 

There are two kinds of ***āgamana***, viz, 

1. ***vipassanāgamana*** and 
1. ***maggāgamana***. 

In these two kinds, ***vipassanāgamana*** plays significant role in the occurrence of the Noble  Path,  while  ***maggāgamana***  called  the  Noble  Path  plays  significant  role  in  the occurrence of the Noble Fruit (***ariya phala***). In the aspect of Supra-mundane sense, only ***vipassanāgamana*** is significant one (***dhura***) due to occurrence of this section relating to cause  of  arising  of  the  Noble  Path.  Therefore,  the  designation  as  ***suññata***  through ***vipassanāgamana*** is the direct usage of the nomenclature of the Noble Path without indirect meaning. [It means that those kinds of designations, which are applied through nobility of itself and object are only indirect usage of the nomenclature of the Noble Path because they are not significant ones(***dhura***).] ***(Abhi-A-1-266)*** 

[Notes: \_\_\_\_ Due to designating on the Noble Path as ***suññata*** through metaphorical usage by which the name of cause, ***vipassanā*** practice, i.e., ***suññata*** is applied metaphorically on  the  result,  the  Noble  Path,  as  ***suññata***,  the  Noble  Path  is  designated  as  ***suññata***  by ***kāra***ṇū***pacāra***. When the Noble Path is designated as ***suññata*** through metaphorical usage by  which  the  name  of  object  (ā***rammanika***),  the  Noble  Path,  the  way  **PAGE-381**  of designating  is  also  achieved  by  ***kāra***ṇū***pacāra***.  When  the  Noble  Path  is  designated  as ***suññata*** through nobility of itself, due to voidness of selfish, anger, delusion, the way of designation is achieved by ***ekadesayūpacāra*** because the name of ***suññata*** is also concerning with space and concept of emptiness (***abhāava paññatti***).] 

22. **How designation as '*appa***ṇ***ihita*' (non-heartfelt desire) is available** 

The Noble Path has also got this kind of as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** (non-heartfelt desire), due to presence of three kinds of bases. How designation as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** is available is as follows.\_\_\_ 

In  this  Noble  admonishment,  the  practicing  meditator  always  takes  into  heart conditioned things through the nature of suffering and discerns as ***dukkha*** over and over again  by  seeing  the  nature  of  being  oppressed  by  continuous  phenomena  of  arising  and passing away. However only the way of discerning as suffering on conditioned things can not give rise to the Noble Path which is called ***vu***ţţ***hāna*** (= emerging), due to ability to enter into ***nibbāna***  rapidly  after  emerging  from  both  conditioned  things  and  89  suffering  of  cyclic ***dhammas***. Ways of discerning as both ***anicca*** (through impermanence) and ***anatta*** (through non-self)  are  appropriate  ones  for  occurrence  of  the  Noble  Path.  Therefore  the  mind  is applied to reach into three kinds of contemplation, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta***, alternatively. However, ***vipassanā*** practice leading to emerging to emerging of that meditator abandons conditioned  things  after  drying  craving  which  is  heartfelt  desire  on  conditioned  things occurring in three realms. This kind of ***vipassanā*** practice is called ***appa***ṇ***ihitāvipassanā***.(It is due to discerning on ***dukkhāvipassanā*** as priority again.) That ***vipassanā*** practice leading to emerging  designates  the  Noble  Path  of itself  as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** through  standing  on  practice which is the basis of occurrence of the Noble Path. Thus the Supra-mundane Noble Path has got designation as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** (non-heartfelt desire), due to kind of ***vipassanā*** practice which is the trace of occurrence of the Path (***vipassanāgamana***). 

In the next method. \_\_\_\_ That Noble Path is absent from heartfelt desirable ***dhammas*** called selfish-desire, anger, delusion. Due to presence of that nobility, the 90 Noble Path has got has designation as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** consequently. 

Furthermoer,  due  to  absence  of  heartfelt  desirable  ***dhammas***  called  selfish-desire, anger, delusion, the Noble ***dhamma, nibbāna***, is also worth designating as ***appa***ṇ***ihita***. Due to occurrence of way of arising by taking that object of  ***nibbāna*** called ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** as object, the Noble Path has got designation as ***appa***ṇ***ihita***. 

Among  those  three  kinds  of  bases  for  designation  a  ***appa***ṇ***ihita,***  in  the  aspect  of indirect discourses of ***Suttanta***, the Noble Path has got designation as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** through nobility  of  **PAGE-382**  itself  and  object.  It  is  right.\_\_\_\_  This  preaching  methodology  of ***Suttana*** is indirect way of preaching indeed. The preaching methodology of ***Abhidhamma***, on the other hand, is not indirect way of perishing but definite one actually. In the aspect of ***Abhidhamma***, it can not, therefore, be designated as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** through either nobility or object but ***vipassanāgamana*** (***vipassanā*** practice which is a trace to give rise to the Noble Path) only. It is right. \_\_\_ Only ***āgamana*** (= a trace to give rise to the Noble Path) is a significant factor. 

There are two kinds of ***āgamana***, viz, 

3. ***vipassanāgamana*** and 
3. ***maggāgamana***. 

In these two kinds, ***vipassanāgamana*** plays significant role in the occurrence of the Noble  Path,  while  ***maggāgamana***  called  the  Noble  Path  plays  significant  role  in  the occurrence of the Noble Fruit (***ariya phala***). In the aspect of Supra-mundane sense, only ***vipassanāgamana*** is significant one (***dhura***) due to occurrence of this section relating to cause  of  arising  of  the  Noble  Path.  Therefore,  the  designation  as  ***appa***ṇ***ihita***  through ***vipassanāgamana*** is the direct usage of the nomenclature of the Noble Path without indirect meaning. [It means that those kinds of designations, which are applied through nobility of itself and object are only indirect usage of the nomenclature of the Noble Path because they are not significant ones(***dhura***).] ***(Abhi-A-1-266,267)*** 

[ ***Notes\_\_\_\_*** In above explanations relating to how designation as ***suññata*** and ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** are available \_\_\_\_it should be recognized on these words, “While the mind is applied to reach into three kinds of contemplations, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta***, alternatively, if the Noble Path occurs during discerning as ***anatta*** again, it is designated as ***suññata***; if the Path occurs during discerning as ***dukkha*** again, it is designated as ***appa***ṇ***ihita***”, are significant words to show direct meaning how designation as ***suññata***  and  ***appa***ṇ***ihita***  are available .As the Noble Path can be attained during discerning as ***anatta***, similarly, it can be attained during discerning as either  ***anicca*** or ***dukkha*** consequently.] 

23. **Three general characters *Pali Quotation (Abhi-A-1-269)* PAGE-383**   

At  the  beginning  of  ***vipassanā***  practice,  even  if  any  kind  of  general  character  is constantly discerned among those three general characters,  “***vipassanā*** practice leading to emerging”  called  ***vu***ţţ***hānagāmini  vipassanā***  emerges  from  conditioned  things  after discerning as such such character, resulting in availability to give designation of the Noble Path which is its result by standing on ***vipassanāgamana*** (= ***vipassanā*** practice which is a trace to give rise to the Noble Path) by means of that that character accordingly. The way of availability to give designation is as follows.\_\_\_ 

After consistant discerning on any kind of character among three general characters, those  remaining  two  characters  other  than  consistant  one  are  also  appropriate  to  discern alternatively. Even through only one kind of character is consistently discerned for ever, the Noble Path called ***vu***ţţ***hāna*** (=emerging) can not occur really. Therefore even if the practicing *bhikkhu*  always  takes  into  heart  conditioned  things  as  ***anicca***  only  but  not  ***dukkha***  and   ***anatta***, the Noble Path knowledge ***called*** ***vu***ţţ***hāna***  can not occur. Only when the way of taking into heart as both ***dukkha*** and 93  ***anatta*** can give rise to the Noble Path knowledge called ***vu***ţţ***hāna***. In the next method.\_\_\_\_ It can emerge from conditioned things which are not only ***anicca,*** but also ***dukkha*** and ***anatta***. While the way of taking into heart as either ***dukkha*** or ***anatta***, is performed constantly, it should be recognized in this way. 

Thus, at the beginning of  ***vipassanā*** practice, even if any kind of general character is constantly discerned among those three general characters, “***vipassanā*** practice leading to emerging”  called  such  ***vu***ţţ***hānagāmini  vipassanā*****  emerges  from**  conditioned  things  after discerning as such character, resulting in availability to give designation of the Noble Path which is its result by standing on ***vipassanāgamana (= vipassanā*** practice which is a trace to give rise to the Noble Path) by means of that that character accordingly. 

Among those three kinds \_\_\_\_ during discerning on conditioned things as ***anicca***, the Noble Path of meditator, which emerges from conditioned things, in the next method, \_\_\_\_ the  Noble  Path  of  meditator,  which  emerges  from  conditioned  things  that  are  so-  called  ***anicca,***  is  designed  as  ***animittamagga***  (=  the  Path  without  any  emblem  of  conditioned things). During discerning on conditioned things as ***dukkha*** the Noble Path of meditator, 

which  emerges  from  conditioned  things,  in  the  next  method\_\_\_\_,  the  Noble  Path  of meditator, which emerges from conditioned things that are so- called  ***dukkha***, is designated as ***appa***ṇ***ihita*** (= the  Path without any heartfelt desire). During discerning on conditioned things as ***anatta***, the Noble Path of the meditator, which emerges from conditioned things, in the next method, \_\_\_\_ the Noble Path of meditator, which emerges from conditioned things that are so- called  ***anatta***, is designed as ***suñata*** ( = the Path without any kind of ***atta*** of conditioned  things).  Thus,  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  those  olden  days commentators had shown evidence of present of ***animittamagga*** through alluding indirect method called ***suttanta. (Abhi-A-1-269)***  

**PAGE-384** 

24. **How seven kinds of Noble Ones are calssified**  

There are seven kinds of Noble-Ones, 95  viz, ***(1)*** ***saddhānusār***ī ( the noble One who always  follows  predominant  faith)  ***(2)  saddhāvimutta***(  the  Noble  One  who  emancipates through  faith,  ***(3)  kāyasakkh***ī  (  the  Noble  One  with  predominant  concentration)  ***(4)  ubhatobhāgavimutta***  (  the  Noble  One  who  emancipates  through  attaining  any  kind  of absorption of Immaterial Sphere) ***(5) dhammānusār***ī (the Noble One who always follows predominant wisdom) ***(6)di***ţţ***hippatta (7) paññāvimutta*** ( the Noble one who emancipates through wisdom). This knowledge of Neutrality Towards Formations is the basic factor to differentiate among those Noble Ones. 

A  such  meditator  usually  fulfils  with  predominant  controlling  factor  of  faith (***saddhindriya)***  through  taking  into  heart  conditioned  things  as  ***anicca***  resulting  in predominance  in  firm  faith  which  is  basic  factor  for  the  occurrence  of  ***saddhānusār***ī ***vipassanār***ī. [Discerning ***vipassanā***  knowledge consists of 34 mind and mental concomitants generally.  It means that the mental concomitant called faith ( ***saddh***ā) is very sharp and powerful among those mental concomitants.] At the Path (-moment) of Upstream-enterer (***sotāpattimaggakkha***ṇ***a***)  That  Noble  One  id  designated  as  ***saddhānusār***ī  person.  At remaining seven kinds of status, viz, the Fruit (-moment) of  Upstream-enterer, the Path (- moment)  of  Once-returnee  (***sakadāgāmimaggakkha***ṇ***a***),  the  Fruit  (-moment)  of  Non- returnee, the Path (-moment) of Arahant (***arahattamaggakkhana***), the Fruit (-moment) of Arahant, those Noble Ones are designated as ***saddhāvimutta*** person. ***(Vs-2-297)***  

For  the  meditator  who  discerns  conditioned  things  as  ***anicca***,  that  knowledge  of Contemplation of Impermanence benefits the improvement of faith by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence (***upanissayapaccaya***). Due to this reason, the Path (- moment) which is adaptable to that faith, in next method, \_\_\_\_ the Path (-moment), which is adaptable  to  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  with  predominant  faith,  is  also  associated  with predominant  faith.  It  means  that  the  person  who  just  attains  the  Path   (-moment)  of  Upstream-enterer (***sotāpattimaggatthāna***) called ***a***ţţ***hamaka*** who has fulfilled  with the Path- knowledge of Upstream-enterer with predominant faith is called ***saddhānusār***ī (= the Noble One who always follows predominant faith consisting in ***vipassanā*** practice which is the basic of occurrence of the Noble Path). (***See Mah***āţī***-2-464-465***) 

[ ***Notes*** \_\_\_\_ At the fruit (-moment) of Arahant there is no  ***saddhāvimutta*** person. In the aspect of indirect way of preaching of ***Suttanta***, if ***saddhāvimutta*** person occurs at the fruit (-moment) of Arachant, it is said that due to presence of predominant faith at the cause, the Path (-moment) of Arachant, or due to occurrence of ***saddhāvimutta*** at the cause, the Path (-moment) of Arahant, the result, , the Fruit (-moment) of Arahant is also designated as ***saddhāvimutta.*** It should be recognized in this way. (***See Mah***āţī***-2-464-465***) 

Furthermore \_\_\_\_ a such meditator usually discerns conditioned things as ***dukkha***. Due to taking into heart in that way, tranquility (***passaddhi***) is improved gradually. Due to improvement  of  tranquility,  predominant  controlling  faculty  of  concentration (***samādhindriya***) is available. The Noble One who emerges from conditioned things through that knowledge of Contemplation on Suffering is designated as ***kāyasakkh***ī person at all eight kinds  of  status,  from  the  Path  (-moment)  of  Upstream-enterer  to  the  Fruit  (-moment)  of Arahant. (***Vs-2-297***) 

**A. Reasonable Questions**    

In  the  commentary  (  ***Abhi-A-1-266***),  there  is  a  reasonable  question  that  due  to occurrence  of  designation  as  two  kinds  called  ***vipassanāgamanadhura***  and ***maggāgamanadhura*** through fixed law, isn’t it true that at the Path (-moment) of  Upstream- enterer,  either  ***saddhānusārī  or  ***dhammānusār***ī  ought  to  occur?  \_\_\_\_  The  answer  is  as follows \_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-385**   

In this case, at the Path (-moment) of Upstream-enterer, only ***saddhānusār***ī ought to occur. (It means ***kāyasakkhī oughtn’t to occur.) The  person called ***kāyasakkh***ī is also absent at the Fruition (-moment) of Arahant. In the  Pali Text of ***Abhidhamma, (Abhi-3-184)***, it is preached in this way. \_\_\_\_,  

Which kind of person is designated  as ***kāyasakkh***ī? In this Noble admonishment, some practicing person experiences with eight kinds of emancipating ***dhammas (vimokkha  dhamma)***  by  all  constituents  of   mentality  (***nāmakāya***).  After  knowing  and  seeing  by wisdom, some cankers (ā***sava***) are finished off for that person. This kind of person is worth designating as ***kāyasakkhī. (Abhi-3-184)*** 

Thus, due to preaching on finishing of some cankers only, there is a question isn't it true to be understood that the person so-called ***kāyasakkh***ī ought to occur ***sekkha*** person (= Noble ones who are still fulfilling to arise the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant, i.e., lower kinds of Noble Ones? \_\_\_\_ 

It is true for this question in the aspect of definite way of preaching without indirect meaning  indeed.  However,  in  this  commentary  called  ***Visuddhi  Magga***,  it  is  explained through  indirect  way  of  preaching  methodology.  How  that  indirect  way  of  preaching methodology is that \_\_\_\_ it is the same occurrence as ***kāyasakkh***ī person, indeed. 100  

It will be explicit. \_\_\_\_ Due to accomplishment of designation as ***kāyasakkh***ī person after  attaining  experience  of  concentration  of  immaterial  sphere  which  is  surpassing concentration  of  sensuous  sphere  and  fine  material  sphere,  with  regarding  to  similarity between those Noble Ones who are worth designating as ***kāyasakkh***ī depending on finishing of some cankers (ā***sava***), i.e., from the person with the Fruit-Knowledge of Upstream-enterer to the person with the Path(-moment) of Arahant and the Arahant who experiences with the concentration of immaterial sphere, depending on which all kinds of cankers are finished off, the latter, the Arahant is preached as ***kāyasakkh***ī in the Pāli Text of ***Pa***ţ***sambhidā*** ***Magga***. In this commentary of ***Visuddhi Magga***, it is, therefore, explained the Arahant as ***kāyasakkh***ī, in an allusion to the way of preaching of Pāli Text of ***Pa***ţ***sambhidā*** ***Magga***. It is right. \_\_\_ It should be recognized the fact that this exegesis of commentary called ***Visuddhi Magga*** is actually the exegesis of indirect preaching of ***Suttanta.*** (***Mah***āţī***-2-465-466***) 101 
PAGE29 
