***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 501 - 550** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN ÑĀ*ṇAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE-501** 

**Associating ideational-base\_\_\_\_\_** In this case for a gentleman or lady who has got joyful ***paṭisandhi*** with three roots, there were (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** during ***paṭisandhi*** mind-moment. Among those ***dhammas***, the contact lies in the side of resultant ***dhamma***, while  the  consciousness  lies  in  the  side  of  causal  ***dhammas***.  Then  if  consciousness  and contact are subtracted from (34), (32), kinds of mental concomitants remain. 

These  remainders  are  called  associating  ideational-base  shown  in  number  4 conditional relation. It should be recognized similarly for remaining mind-moments. 

Life-continuum mind-contact and death mind-contact must be discerned by taking example of ***paṭisandhi*** mind-contact. Now it will be continued to present way of keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of each contact consisting in eye-door-cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive process for visible line as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. **Five-doors-adverting mind-contact (visible line)** 
1. Due  to  arising  of  “the  heart-base  (=  ideational-base)”,  five-doors-adverting  mind- contact  arises.  The  heart-base  (=  ideational-base)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  five-doors- adverting mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of “the sight-base,” five-doors-adverting mind-contact arises. The sight- base is causal ***dhamma***; five-doors-adverting mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of “five-doors-adverting mind-base”, five-doors-adverting mind-contact arises. Five-doors-adverting mind-base is causal ***dhamma***; five-doors-adverting mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of “(9) kinds of associating ideational base”, five-doors-adverting mind- contact arises. (9) kinds of associating ideational base is causal ***dhamma***; five-doors- adverting mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. **Eye-contact (*cakkhu samphassa*)** 
1. Due to arising of the eye-base, the eye-contact arises. The eye-base is causal ***dhamma***; the eye-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  sight-base,  he  eye-contact  arises.  The  sight-base  is  causal ***dhamma***; the eye-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  “seeing-consciousness  mind-base,  the  eye-contact  arises.  seeing- consciousness mind-base is causal ***dhamma***; the eye-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of (6) kinds of associating ideational base, the eye-contact arises. (6) kinds  of  associating  ideational  base  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  the  eye-contact  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. **Receiving mind-contact** 
1. Due to arising of the heart-base (= ideational-base), receiving mind-contact arises. The heart –base ( = ideational-base) is causal ***dhamma***; receiving mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

2. Due to arising of the sight-base, receiving mind-contact arises. The sight-base is causal ***dhamma***; receiving mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***.  
2. Due to arising of receiving mind-base, receiving mind-contact arises. Receiving mind- base is causal ***dhamma***; receiving mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Due  to  arising  of  “(9)  kinds  of  associating  ideational-base”,  receiving  mind-contact arises.  (9)  kinds  of  associating  ideational-base  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  receiving  mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-502** 

5. **Investigating mind-contact** 
1. Due to arising of the heart-base (= ideational-base), investigating mind-contact arises. The  heart-base  (=  ideational-base)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  investigating  mind-contact  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  sight-base,  investigating  mind-contact  arises.  The  sight-base  is causal ***dhamma***; investigating mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of investigating mind-base, investigating mind-contact arises. Investigating mind-base is causal ***dhamma***; investigating mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  “associating  ideational-base”  investigating  mind-contact  arises. Associating  ideational-base  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  investigating  mind-contact  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

[If investigating mind-moment associates with joyful feeling, associating ideational-base are of (10) kinds; if that mid-moment associates with neutral feeling, associating ideational-base are of (9) kinds respectively.] 

6. **Determining mind-contact** 
1. Due to arising of the heart-base (= ideational-base), determining mind-contact arises. The heart-base (= ideational-base) is causal ***dhamma***; determining mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***; 
1. Due to arising of the sight-base, determining mind-contact arises. The sight-base is causal ***dhamma***; determining mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***; 
1. Due to arising of determining mind-base, determining mind-contact arises. Determining mind-base is causal ***dhamma***; determining mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***; 
1. Due  to  arising  of  (10)  kinds  of  associating  ideational-base,  determining  mind-contact arises. (10) kinds of associating ideational-base is causal ***dhamma***; determining mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***; 
7. **The first impulsion mind-contact** 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  heart-base  (=  ideational-base),  the  first  impulsion  mind-contact arises. The heart-base (= ideational-base) is causal ***dhamma***; the first impulsion mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE3

2. Due to arising of the sight-base, the first impulsion mind-contact arises. The sight-base is causal ***dhamma***; the first impulsion mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Due to arising of the first impulsion mind-base, the first impulsion mind-contact arises. The first impulsion  mind-base is causal ***dhamma***; the first impulsion mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Due  to  arising  of  (32)  kinds  of  associating  ideational-base,  the  first  impulsion  mind- contact  arises.  (32)  kinds  of  associating  ideational-base  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  the  first impulsion mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-503** 

8. **The first registering mind-contact** 
1. Due to arising of the heart-base (= ideational-base), the first registering mind-contact arises. The heart-base (= ideational-base) is causal ***dhamma***; the first registering mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the sight-base (= ideational-base), the first registering  mind-contact arises. The sight-base (= ideational-base) is causal ***dhamma***; the first registering mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the first registering mind-base (= ideational-base), the first registering mind-contact  arises.  The  first  registering  mind-base  (=  ideational-base)  is  causal ***dhamma***; the first registering mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of (32) kinds of associating ideational-base (= ideational-base), the first registering mind-contact arises. (32) kinds of associating ideational-base (= ideational- base) is causal ***dhamma***; the first registering mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

[The second registering must also be discerned similarly. In this case, great consequence joyful  registering  with  knowledge  mind-contact  is  extracted  as  example.  In  associating ideational-base, the range of numbers of mental concomitants may be varied depending on whether with rootless or root cause, joyful or neutral feeling, with knowledge or without knowledge.  It  must,  therefore,  be  discerned  as  shown  in  Tables  of  ***nāmakammaṭṭhāna***, **Volume II**.] 

9. **The mind-door-adverting mind-contact (follower mind-door-cognitive process)** 
1. Due to arising of the heart-base (= ideational-base), mind-door-adverting mind-contact arises. The heart-base (= ideational-base) is causal ***dhamma***; mind-door-adverting mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the sight-base (= ideational-base), mind-door-adverting mind-contact arises. The sight-base (= ideational-base) is causal ***dhamma***; mind-door-adverting mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  mind-door-adverting  mind-base  (=  ideational-base),  mind-door- adverting  mind-contact  arises.  Mind-door-adverting  mind-base  (=  ideational-base)  is causal ***dhamma***; mind-door-adverting mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of (10) kinds of associating ideational-base (= ideational-base), mind-door- adverting  mind-contact  arises.  (10)  kinds  of  associating  ideational-base  (=  ideational- base) is causal ***dhamma***; mind-door-adverting mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE6

[Notes:\_\_\_\_\_ Those impulsions, registering mind-contacts of follower mind-door cognitive process are similar to way of discerning of impulsions, registering mind-contacts of eye-door- cognitive process. Remaining cognitive process, ear-door-cognitive process etc., must also be discerned by taking example of eye-door-cognitive process. Although five-doors-adverting, determining, impulsions in five-doors-cognitive process and mind-door-adverting, impulsions in mind-door-cognitive process are not inclusive in consequence round ***dhammas***, those are worth  discerning  together  with  consequence  round  ***dhammas***  not  to  remain  all  ultimate elements. All contacts consisting in both wholesome and unwholesome groups of (6) lines must be discerned thoroughly. Now ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, body-contact with a little significant difference would be presented continuously.] 

**PAGE-504** 

10. **Ear-contact** (***sotasamphassa***) 
1. Due to arising of the ear-base, the ear-contact arises. The ear-base is causal ***dhamma***; the ear-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  sound-base,  the  ear-contact  arises.  The  sound-base  is  causal ***dhamma***; the ear-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  hearing  consciousness  (mind-base),  the  ear-contact  arises.  The hearing  consciousness  (mind-base)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  the  ear-contact  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the (6) kinds of associating ideational base, the ear-contact arises. The 

(6) kinds of associating ideational base is causal ***dhamma***; the ear-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

11. **Nose-contact (*ghānasamphassa*)** 
1. Due to arising of the nose-base, the nose-contact arises. The nose-base is causal ***dhamma***; the nose-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  odour-base,  the  nose-contact  arises.  The  odour-base  is  causal ***dhamma***; the nose-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the smelling consciousness (mind-base), the nose-contact arises. The smelling  consciousness  (mind-base)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  the  nose-contact  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the (6) kinds of associating ideational base, the nose-contact arises. The 

(6) kinds of associating ideational base is causal ***dhamma***; the nose-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

12. **Tongue-contact (*jihvāsamphassa*)** 
1. Due to arising of the tongue-base, the tongue-contact arises. The tongue-base is causal ***dhamma***; the tongue-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the flavour-base, the tongue-contact arises. The flavour-base is causal ***dhamma***; the tongue-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the tasting consciousness (mind-base), the tongue-contact arises. The tasting  consciousness  (mind-base)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  the  tongue-contact  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE5

4. Due to arising of the (6) kinds of associating ideational base, the tongue-contact arises. The (6) kinds of associating ideational base is causal ***dhamma***; the tongue-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-505** 

13. **Body-contact (*kāyasamphassa*)** 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  body-base,  the  body-contact  arises.  The  body-base  is  causal ***dhamma***; the body-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  the  touch-base,  the  body-contact  arises.  The  touch-base  is  causal ***dhamma***; the body-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the touching consciousness (mind-base), the body-contact arises. The touching  consciousness  (mind-base)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  the  body-contact  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the (6) kinds of associating ideational base, the body-contact arises. The 

(6) kinds of associating ideational base is causal ***dhamma***; the body-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

So  far  as  this  extent,  way  of  discerning  can  be  taken  as  example.  Every  contact consisting in every mind-moment for (6) lines must be kept in mind by insight. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing the phenomenon  how each resultant ***dhamma*** arises due to apparent arising of respective causal ***dhamma***. It should be noticed the fact the knowledge of Cause and Condition can not be improved even though both sides of causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  are  recited  by  verbally  and  mentally  but  not  seen  by penetrative insight knowledge. It should be recognized similarly in every way of discerning. 

14. ***upādinnakapavatti kathā*** 

According  to  explanations  of  above  commentatries,  this  noble  preaching  of dependent-origination is a kind of preaching showing how causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of ultimate nature of corporeality-mentality cycle incessantly in the continuity of aggregates of living beings, due to presence of obsession as "my resultant ***dhamma***" through the action (***kamma***)  which  is  approached  and  taken  as  object  by  craving-wrong  view. (***upādinnakapavattikathā = upādiṇṇakapavattikathā***) 

Especially it is a kind of preaching that shows apparently causal ***dhammas*** (***paccaya***) and  resultant  ***dhammas***  (***paccayuppanna***)  which  are  inclusive  in  a  single  continuity  of corporeality-mentality  (***ekasantatipariyāpanna***).  In  this  work,  therefore,  presents  the phenomenon of causal relationship of the ultimate nature of corporeality-mentality which are inclusive in a single continuity of corporeality-mentality, form the ignorance until the birth, ageing-death, as priority. In accordance with the sub-commentary called ***Anupāda suttanta Tīkā (M-tī-3-275)*** which amplifies that "***parasantānagate catesam santānavibhāgam akatvā bahiddhā  bhāva  aāmaññato  sammasanam,  ayam  sāvakanam  sammasanacāro***"  because external phenomena are similar to each other, it would be presented the way of discerning on those phenomena on a whole only, in this work. 

**PAGE-506** 

**2.9. *phassa paccayā vedanā*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE8

Due to arising of contact, feeling arise ***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-169; Vs-2-201)*** 

**Feeling (*vedanā*)** \_\_\_\_\_ There are (6) kinds of feelings, viz., the feeling produced by the eye- contact (***cakkhu samphassajā vedanā***), the feeling produced by the ear-contact, the feeling produced  by  the  nose-contact,  the  feeling  produced  by  the  tongue-contact,  the  feeling produced by the body-contact, the feeling produced by the mind-contact, though doors, in brief. There are (89) varieties of feelings which are associating with (90) kinds subtracted by one consciousness. In this case, however, only consequence feeling which associate with (32) kinds of mundane consciousness must be inferred as the basic meaning of the term, ***vedanā*** (feeling) (***Abhi-A-2-169; Vs-2-201***) 

1. ***cakkhu samphassajā vedanā* (= the feeling produced by eye-contact) *Pāli Quotation (Sam-A-2-15; M-A-1-226)*** 

(**Essence of *Pāli Quotation***)\_\_\_\_ Due to presence of preaching in Pali Text, ***Abhidhamma Vibhaṅga (Abhi-2-16)***, that\_\_\_\_\_ the feeling produced by eye-contact are both wholesome, unwholesome and indeterminate (***avyākata***) ones, those wholesome feeling, unwholesome feeling, indeterminate feeling (***avayākata vedanā***), which are arising in the eye-door, are designated  as  ***cakkhusamphassajā  vedanā***.  As  those  names,  ***sāriputta***  =  the  son  of  the woman of ***Brahmin*** caste called ***Sari, Mantāniputta*** = the son of the woman of ***Brahmin*** caste  called  ***Mantani***,  are  descended  from  the  mother  name,  similarly  it  is  the  name descended from depended base-corporality called the eye-base which is similar to mother. As a direct meaning, the feeling which is produced by the eye-contact is designated as ***cakkhu samphassajā  vedanā.***  It  should  be  recognized  similarly  on  the  remaining  feelings  ***sota samphassajā vedanā*** etc. This is the method that counts all kinds of feelings which can be arisen  by  the  eye-contact  in  discriminately.  In  this  preaching  of  dependent-origination, however, only consequence feelings are desired to be inferred as the basic meaning. Only those  consequence  feelings  which  associate  with  seeing-consciousness,  receiving, investigating, registering consciousness must be inferred as the basic meaning of ***cakkhu samphassajā  vedanā***.  It  may  be  two  kinds,  both  wholesome  consequence  feeling  and unwholesome consequence feeling. Those feelings, the feeling produced by the ear-contact etc,  must also be understood in similar way. According to the term, ***mano samphassajā vedanā*** (= the feeling produced by mind-contact), all kinds of feelings which associate with the  mind-consciousness  element  (***manoviññāṇa  dhātu***)  must  be  inferred.  In  this  case, especially,  only  those  feelings  which  associate  with  the  consequence  mind-consciousness element must be inferred as ***vedanā***. (***Sam-A-2-15; M-A-1-226***) 

**PAGE-507** 

2. ***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā* (due to arising of the eye-contact, the feeling arises)** 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-A-3-5)*** 

Those words, "***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***", mean receiving, investigating, determining, impulsion (registering) feelings which arise depending on the eye-contact. There is no need to say the feeling associating with seeing-consciousness is worth designating as "***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***". Those remaining feelings, "***sota-samphassa paccayā*** 
PAGE7

***vedanā =* above feelings which arise depending on the ear-contact**" etc., must also be understood in this way. (***Sam-A-3-5***) 

In  accordance  with  above  explanations  of  commentaries,  those  words, "***cakkhusamphassajā vedanā***", and "***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***", means those kinds of feelings which associate with seeing consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, impulsions, registering consciousness. Furthermore, because those feelings, which associate with  mind-door-advertence,  impulsions,  registerings,  which  take  the  visible-object successively  after  the  eye-door-cognitive process, are benefited by  the  eye-contact,  those kinds  of  feelings  are  also  designated  as  ***cakkhusamphassajā  vedanā,  cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***. (***Abhi-A-3-368***) 

During performing ***vipassanā*** practice, according to the Supreme Buddha's instruction found in ***Cūļa rāhulovāda Suttanta***, all associating ***dhammas*** together with the feeling, i.e., feeling-aggregate, perception-aggregate, formation-aggregate, consciousness-aggregate must be discerned sweepingly for every mind-moment which arises depending on the eye-contact through discerning the feeling as priority. The feeling must be discerned as decisive factor during  discerning  causal  relationship  only.  It  should  be  understood  similarly  on  those remaining feelings, ***"sota samphassajā vedanā"***, etc. 

3. **Conditional relations** 
1. The  eye-contact  benefits  associating  feeling  produced  by  eye-contact,  which  arise depending on the eye-base. 
1. The  ear-contact  benefits  associating  feeling  produced  by  ear-contact,  which  arise depending on the ear-base. 
1. The  nose-contact  benefits  associating  feeling  produced  by  nose-contact,  which  arise depending on the nose-base. 
1. The tongue-contact benefits associating feeling produced by tongue-contact, which arise depending on the tongue-base. 
1. The  body-contact  benefits  associating  feeling  produced  by  body-contact,  which  arise depending on the body-base. 

by means of efficiency of each (8) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence,  ***kamma***  consequence,  nutriment,  association,  presence,  non-disappearance. (***Abhi-A-2-170, Vs-2-201***) 

**PAGE-508** 

1. The eye-contact benefits for arising of those sensual consequence feelings which arise by means of receiving, investigating, registering in the eye-door-cognitive process, 
1. The ear-contact benefits for arising of those sensual consequence feelings which arise by means of receiving, investigating, registering in the ear-door-cognitive process, 
1. The nose-contact benefits for arising of those sensual consequence feelings which arise by means of receiving, investigating, registering in the nose-door-cognitive process, 
1. The tongue-contact benefits for arising of those sensual consequence feelings which arise by means of receiving, investigating, registering in the tongue-door-cognitive process, 
1. The body-contact benefits for arising of those sensual consequence feelings which arise by means of receiving, investigating, registering in the body-door-cognitive process, 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE10

by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only. (***Abhi-A-2-170,*** 

***Vs-2-201***) 

In  this  case,  each  five  kinds  of  contacts,  eye-contact  etc,  benefits  respective consequence feeling, which associates with the receiving that is contiguous mind-moment after  themselves  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of  contiguity  (***anatara***),  immediate contiguity  (***samanantara***),  contiguous  determinative  dependence  (***anantarūpanissaya***), absence (***natthi***), disappearance (***vigata***). Because those relations, relation of absence and relation  of  disappearance,  are  inclusive  within  relations  of  contiguity  and  immediate contiguity;  and  then  those  relations  of  contiguity  and  immediate  contiguity,  in  turn,  are inclusive within the relation of contiguous determinative dependence; the contact benefits those feelings which associate with investigating and registering by means of efficiency of relation  of  natural  determinative  dependence  (***pakatūpanissaya  paccaya***)  only;  the commentary explains those are benefited by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only in order to express how that relation of determinative dependence, which concern with investigating, registering, benefits those feelings. (***Mūlaṭī-2-120, Mahāṭī-2-325; Anuṭī-2-132***) 

1. ***sahajāta phassa* (compatible contact)** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-170, Vs-2-201)*** 

***(Mahāṭī-2-325)*** 

In the mind-door cognitive process, those consequence feelings which arise by means of registering are benefited by associating contact, which can be designated as compatible mind-contact (***sahajāta mao samphassa***), through efficiency of (8) kinds of relation that way. (***Abhi-A-2-170, Vs-2-201***) 

**PAGE-509** 

In each door, eye-door-cognitive process etc, those various contacts which associate with  consequence  consciousness  called  seeing-consciousness,  receiving,  investigating, registering, benefit respective feelings which associate with those consequence consciousness called seeing-consciousness, receiving, investigating, registering by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations. Those consequence feelings which arise by means of registering in the mind-door-cognitive process are also benefited by those registering-contacts which can be designated as compatible mind-contacts which associate with those registering consciousness by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations. The meaning must be yoke in this way. (***Mahāṭī-2-325***) 

It  means  the  contact  associating  with  receiving-consciousness  benefits  the  feeling within the same mind-moment by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations; the contact associating  with  investigating-consciousness  benefits  the  feeling  within  the  same  mind- moment by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations and so forth. 

According to these explanations \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. The eye-contact and receiving mind-contact benefit the receiving-feeling, 
1. the eye-contact and investigating mind-contact benefit the investigating-feeling, 
1. the eye-contact and registering mind-contact benefit the registering-feeling, respectively. It should be recognized in this way. 
PAGE9

The eye-contact benefits the receiving-feeling by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence while the receiving mind-contact benefits the receiving-feeling by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations. It should be recognized on investigating and registering mind-moments similarly. 

2. ***ārammaṇūpanissaya-pakatūpanissaya*  (the  object  determinative  dependence  -  the natural determinative dependence)** 
* ***ārammaṇūpa nissaya pakatūpanissayesu nānāvīthivasena purimatarā (Abhi-A-3-368)*** 

According to above explanation of ***Paṭṭhāna***, a cognitive process can benefit another one  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of  object  determinative  dependence  and  natural determinative dependence. Therefore the eye-contact benefits not only the feeling together with  associating  mental  ***dhamma***  within  eye-door-cognitive  process  but  also  groups  of mental  ***dhammas***  of  the  mind-door-cognitive  process,  such  as  the  follower  mind-door- cognitive process, which also take the visible-object successively by means of efficiency of relation  of  determinative  dependence.  It  can  be  understood  the  fact  proliferation  of wholesome, unwholesome and indeterminate ***dhammas*** by taking the visible-object in the continuum of the person with good sight, is due to the benefit of the eye-contact. 

**c. *paṭsandhi-bhaṅga-cuti*** 

The contact which associates with ***paṭsandhi*** consequence occurring in three realms called sensual-fine material-immaterial benefits compatible ***paṭsandhi*** consequence feeling; the  contact,  which  associates  with  ***bhavanga***  consequence  (life-continuum  consequence) benefits compatible life-continuum consequence feeling; the contact which associates with ***cuti***  consequence  (death-consequence)  benefits  compatible  death  consequence  feeling;  by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations, compatibility etc. (***Abhi-A-2-170; Vs-2-201***)*** 

**PAGE-510** 

4. **Mind-door-adverting mind-contact** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-170; Vs-2-201,202)*** 

***(Mūlaṭī-2-120, Anuṭī-2-132)*** 

The  mind-contact  which  associates  with  mind-door-adverting  within  mind-door- cognitive  process  benefits  the  sensual  consequence  feelings,  which  arise  by  means  of registering, by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only. (***Abhi-A-2- 170; Vs-2-201,202***) 

The resultant consequence ***dhammas***, which are obsessed as "my consequence" by the action  which  is  approached  and  surrounded  by  craving-wrong  view  are  called  ***upādinna (=upādiṇṇa)*** ***dhamma***. In other words, the action round called formation-action, which arise depending  on  defilement  round  called  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  are  present.  Those consequence round ***dhammas*** which arise depending on the action round called formation- action, which are surrounded by defilement rounds called ignorance-craving-clinging, are designated as ***upādinna dhamma***. Wholesome, unwholesome, mere functioning ***dhammas***, (***kriya*)** on the other hand, are not ***upādinna dhamma*** but are ***anupādinna dhamma*** only. 

Teachers of other school of thought desired the opinion that those contacts which associates  with  wholesome,  unwholesome,  mere  functioning  consciousness,  which  are 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE12

***anupāadinna*** ***dhammas*** are also causal ***dhammas*** which can benefit consequence feelings. Therefore the commentator sayadaw explained the fact the mind-door-adverting mind-contact is causal ***dhamma*** which can benefit registering consequence feeling. It should be recognized that explanation also is the word which expresses a trace (***mukkhamatta dassana***). By taking example  in  this  method,  it  should  be  yoked  the  facts  both  every  contact  consisting  in wholesome,  unwholesome  consequence  mere  functioning  mind-moments,  which  are contiguous  one,  benefits  for  arising  of  consequence  feeling  by  means  of  efficiency  of relations  of  contiguity,  immediate  contiguity,  determinative  dependence,  absence, disappearance and every contact consisting in those mind-moments which are not contiguous ones, benefits the consequence feeling by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only. It should be recognized on these words that "these words are saying to show how the causal relationship between contact and feeling occurs but not to show those contact  and  feeling  are  inclusive  in  the  mind-door-cognitive  process".  (***Mūlaṭī-2-120, Mahāṭī-2-325; Anuṭī-2-132***) 

**PAGE-511** 

It should be recognized similarly on explanation of these sub-commentator Sayadaws for five-doors-cognitive processes. 

5. **The essence to be understood previously** 

In this section, the following facts should be recognized previously. 

1. ***cakkhusamphassa*** \_\_\_\_ The contact which arises together with the seeing-consciousness is called the eye-contact (***cakkhusamphassa***). (***Abhi-A-138***) 
1. ***cakkhusamphassajā  vedanā***  \_\_\_\_  If  it  is  said  indiscriminately,  those  feelings  which associate  with  seeing-consciousness,  receiving,  investigating,  determining,  impulsions, registering are called ***cakkhusamphassajā vedanā***. (***M-A-1-226, Sam-A-2-15***) 
1. ***cakkhusamphassa  paccayā  vedanā***\_\_\_\_  Those  feelings  which  associate  with  seeing- consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, impulsions (registering), which arise depending on the eye-contact are called ***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***. (***Sam-A-3.5***) 

According to the commentary of Conditional Relations (***paṭṭhāna***), (***Abhi-A-3-368***), because the eye-contact (mental ***dhammas*** of seeing consciousness) benefits those feelings within mind-door-cognitive process  which takes visible-object continuously by means of a efficiency of relation of determinative dependence, those feelings within mind-door-cognitive process can also be said as ***cakkhusamphassajā vedanā***, ***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***. However  these  feelings  have  already  got  the  specific  designation  as  ***manosamphassa paccayā vedanā = manosamphassa paccayā vedanā***, resulting in availability to designate as ***cakkhusamphassajā = vedanā cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***. It should be recognized similarly on ***sotasamphassajā vedanā*** etc. 

The  words  of  commentary  ***paṭṭhāna  (Abhi-A-3-368)***  of   are  explained  as  the explanation related to how preceding wholesome ***dhamma*** benefits succeeding wholesome, unwholesome,  indeterminate  ***dhammas***;  how  preceding  unwholesome  ***dhamma***  benefits succeeding  unwholesome,  wholesome,  indeterminate  ***dhammas***;  how  preceding indeterminate  ***dhammas***  benefits  succeeding  indeterminate,  wholesome,  unwholesome ***dhammas***. In that explanation, it is explained cause and result have got different cognitive processes. Groups of mental ***dhammas*** of eye-door-cognitive process can benefit those of mental  ***dhammas***  of  mind-door-cognitive  process  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of determinative dependence accordingly. In other words, any ***dhammas*** within the eye-door-
PAGE11

cognitive  process,  i.e.,  wholesome  or  unwholesome  or  indeterminate,  can  benefit  those wholesome  or  unwholesome  or  indeterminate  ***dhammas***  within  the  mind-door-cognitive dependence efficiency of determinative dependence accordingly. Because the eye-contact is inclusive in indeterminate ***dhammas*** of the eye-door-cognitive process and the feeling which is resultant ***dhammas*** consists in the mind-door-cognitive process, it is explained that the eye- contact can benefit those feelings within the mind-door-cognitive process which takes the visible-object continuously by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence. It should be considered the explanation found in ***Mahāṭīā*** as "***aṭṭhakathāyam pana samāna vīthiyam cakkusamphassapaccayā dikata ekantikāti katvā ettha labbhamānatā, na pana asamānavīthiyam labbhamānatā paṭikkhittā. (Mūlaṭī)*** The commentary explains definitely because  the  relation  of  the  eye-contact  is present certainly  within  the  eye-door-cognitive process. It should be recognized it does not reject relation of the eye-contact is present within 

the mind-door-cognitive process also, which is different cognitive process from the eye-door- cognitive process. 

**PAGE-512** 

6. **Wholesome, unwholesome, indeterminate feeling *Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-36) two paragraphs*** 

Those feelings produced by the eye-contact (***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***) are feelings which associate with these (44) kinds of consciousness, viz., 

1. feelings which associate with (8) kinds of sensual great wholesome impulsions; 
1. feelings which associate with (12) kinds of unwholesome impulsions; 
1. feelings which associate with five-doors-adverting consciousness 
1. feelings which associate with (2) kinds of receiving consciousness 
1. feelings which associate with (3) kinds of investigating consciousness without root cause; 
1. feelings which associate with (mind-door-advertence) determining consciousness called mere functioning mind-consciousness element without root cause; 
1. feelings  which  associate  with(8)  kinds  of  great  consequence  consciousness,  which perform function of registerings; 
1. feelings  which  associate  with  (9)  kinds  of  mere  functioning  impulsions  called ***hasituppāda*** and great mere functioning impulsions. 

Those  feelings  which  associate  with  two  kinds  of  seeing-consciousness  are  also ***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***. If these two feelings which associate with two kinds of seeing-consciousness  are  added,  there  are  (46)  kinds  of  feelings  in  total.  It  should  be recognized similarly for remaining doors, ear-door etc. (***Abhi-A-2-36***) 

**g. The feeling which associates with five-doors-adverting consciousness** 

***Pāli Quotation (Mūlaṭī-2-30)*** 

In  above  commentary  called  ***Sammohavinodanī***,  it  should  be  recognized  the explanation that "the feeling which associates with five-doors-adverting consciousness is the feeling produced by the eye-contact (***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***)" is explained in periphrasis method (***pariyāya***). The essence is as follows. The arising of the eye-contact is impossible  in  the  absence  of  the  feeling  of  adverting  called  five-doors-adverting.  It  is explained in that way because it is appropriate to say in the periphrasis method as "the feeling of five-door-adverting arises due to the eye-contact", which is resultant from yoking of that 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE14

causal feeling and the result, that eye-contact. In the aspect of definite method, it should be recognized  only  those  feelings  which  arise  after  the  eye-contact  must  be  inferred  as ***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***.(***Mūlaṭī-2-30***) 

**PAGE-513 H. The statement found in commentary, sub-commentary of Pali Text of Vibhaṅga** 

In  the  Pali  Text  of  ***Abhidhamma  Vibhaṅga  (Abhi-2-25)***,  commentary  of ***Sammohavinodanī  (Abhi-A-2-36)***,  and  sub-commentary  called  ***Mūlaṭīkā,  (Mūlaṭī-2-30), cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā and cakkhusamphassajā vedanā*** are separately defined as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

***cakkhusamphassa  paccayā  vedanā***  \_\_\_\_  Those  feeling,  which  associate  with  receiving, investigating,  determining,  impulsions,  registerings,  which  arise  depending  on  the  eye- contact, are called ***cakkhusamphassa paccayā vedanā***. (***Abhi-A-2-36***) 

***cakkhusamphassajā vedanā*** \_\_\_\_ Those feelings which associate with seeing-consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, impulsions, registerings, which arise depending on the eye-contact, are called ***cakkhusamphassajā vedanā***. (***Abhi-A-2-36***) 

The feeling which associates with the seeing-consciousness has got a single name called ***cakkhusamphassajā vedanā*** while those feelings which associate with remaining ones mentioned above have got both kinds of names. 

During  performing  ***vipassanā***  practice,  each  feeling  together  with  associating ***dhammas*** must be discerned minglingly through the feeling as priority. Both wholesome groups  and  unwholesome  groups  must  be  discerned  thoroughly.  It  should  be  recognized similarly on remaining doors, ear-door etc. 

4. **Way of keeping in mind causal and resultant *dhammas*** 
1. Due to arising of the eye-contact, ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arise. 

The eye-contact is causal ***dhamma***; ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feelings are resultant ***dhammas***. 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_\_ In the side of causal ***dhammas***, there is the contact which associates with the seeing-consciousness. In the side of resultant ***dhammas***, all kinds of feeling of eye-door- cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive process which takes visible-object continuously. That  eye-contact  benefits  ***cakkhusamphassajā***  feeling  which  associates  with  the  seeing- consciousness by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence,  ***kamma***-consequence,  nutriment,  association,  presence,  non-disappearance.  It benefits the receiving feeling by means of efficiency of (5) kinds of relations, viz., contiguity, immediate contiguity, determinative dependence, absence, disappearance. It benefits those feelings of investigating, determining, impulsions, registerings, and impulsions, registerings of  mind-door-cognitive  process,  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of  determinative dependence only.] 

**PAGE-514** 

2. Due to arising of the ear-contact, ***sotasamphassajā*** feeling arise. The ear-contact is causal ***dhamma***; ***sotasamphassajā*** feelings are resultant ***dhammas***. 
2. Due to arising of the nose-contact, ***ghānasamphassajā*** feeling arise. 
PAGE13

The nose-contact is causal ***dhamma***; ***ghānasamphassajā*** feelings are resultant ***dhammas***. 

4. Due to arising of the tongue-contact, ***jihāsamphassajā*** feeling arise. The tongue-contact is causal ***dhamma***; ***jihāsamphassajā*** feelings are resultant ***dhammas***. 
4. Due to arising of the body-contact, ***kāyasamphassajā*** feeling arise. The body-contact is causal ***dhamma***; ***kāyasamphassajā*** feelings are resultant ***dhammas***. 
4. Due to arising of the mind-contact, ***manosamphassajā*** feeling arise. 

The mind-contact is causal ***dhamma***; ***manosamphassajā*** feelings are resultant ***dhammas***. 

***manosamphassa*** \_\_\_\_ According to the term, ***manosamphassa*** (mind-contact), the contact, which associates with consequence registering consciousness, which is inclusive in the mind- door-cognitive-process must be inferred According to the term, ***manosamphassajā vedanā,*** the  feeling  which  associates  with  that  consequence  registering  consciousness  must  be inferred. That mind-contact benefits for arising of that ***manosamphassajā vedanā*** by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations mentioned above. (***Abhi-A-2-170***) 

In the next method\_\_\_\_\_ according to the term, ***manosamphassa*** (mind-contact), the contact which associates with the mind-door-adverting consciousness. According to the term, ***manosamphassajā vedanā***, the feeling which associates with the consequence registering consciousness, which consists in that mind-door-cognitive process must be inferred. That mind-door-adverting  mind-contact  benefits  for  arising  of  registering  ***manosamphassajā vedanā*** by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only. The way of discerning found in (***Abhi-A-2-170***) is the same way mentioned above. 

**6.   Due to arising of the mind-contact, *manosamphassajā* feeling arise.** 

The mind-contact is causal ***dhamma***; ***manosamphassajā*** feelings are resultant ***dhammas***. In  the  next  method,  the  impulsions  mind-contacts  also  benefit  registering ***manosamphassajā vedanā*** by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only. The way of discerning found in (***Mūlaṭī-2-120***) is the same way mentioned above. 

\6. Due to arising of impulsion mind-contact, registering ***manosamphassajā*** feeling arises. Impulsion mind-contact is causal ***dhamma***; registering ***manosamphassajā*** feeling is resultant ***dhamma***. 

5. **The next method, mind-contact = life-continuum mind-contact** 
* ***manosamphassoti bhavangasahajāto samphasso. (Sam-A-3-5)*** 

According to the term, ***manosamphassa*** (mind-contact), life-continuum mind-contact which lies previously to the mind-door-adverting must be inferred. 

* ***vedayitanti  javana  sahajātā  vedanā,  sahāvajjanena  bhavanga  sahajātāpi  vaṭṭatiyeva. (Sam-A-3-5)*** 

**PAGE-515** 

According to explanation of above commentary, those feelings which associate with the life- continuum,  mind-door-adverting,  impulsions,  (registering),  must  be  inferred  as  the  basic meaning  of  ***vedanā***.  (According  to  the  term,  impulsions,  all  kinds  of  wholesome unwholesome, mere functioning, mundane and Supra-mundane inpulsions must be inferred.) Way of discerning is as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE15

\6.   Due to arising of life-continuum mind-contact, ***manosamphassajā*** feelings arise. 

Life  continuum  mind-contact  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  ***manosamphassajā***  feelings  are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(All kinds of feelings which associate with mind-moments of mind-door-cognitive process together with the life-continuum must be discerned on a whole.) 

The ways of discerning mentioned above are the system of discerning by which the phenomena how these resultant feelings, 

1. For  visible-object  line,  feelings  consisting  in  eye-door-cognitive  process,  mind-door- cognitive process, 
1. For  audible-object  line,  feelings  consisting  in  ear-door-cognitive  process,  mind-door- cognitive process, 
1. For olfactory-object line, feelings consisting in nose-door-cognitive process, mind-door- cognitive process, 
1. For  gustative-object  line,  feelings  consisting  in  tongue-door-cognitive  process,  mind- door-cognitive process, 
1. For  tactile-object  line,  feelings  consisting  in  body-door-cognitive  process,  mind-door- cognitive process, 
1. For  ideational-object  line,  feelings  consisting  in mind-door-cognitive process  together with life-continuum, 

arise due to respective  contact, are discerned on a whole.  If the  knowledge of righteous ***meditator*** is unable to discern on a whole, causal and resultant ***dhamma*** must be kept in mind through specific mind moment one after another as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Due to arising of eye-contact, (five-doors-adverting) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye-contact is causal ***dhamma***; (five-doors-adverting) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of eye-contact, (seeing-consciousness) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye-contact is causal ***dhamma***; (seeing-consciousness) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of eye-contact, (receiving) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye- contact is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of eye-contact, (investigating) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye- contact  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)  ***cakkhusamphassajā***  feeling  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of eye-contact, (determining) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye- contact  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (determining)  ***cakkhusamphassajā***  feeling  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of eye-contact, (impulsion) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye- contact is causal ***dhamma***; (impulsion) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling is resultant ***dhamma***. (seven times of impulsions must be discerned meticulously) 

**PAGE-516** 

7. Due to arising of eye-contact, (registering) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye- contact  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (registering)  ***cakkhusamphassajā***  feeling  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
7. Due to arising of eye-contact, (mind-doors-adverting) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling arises. The eye-contact is causal ***dhamma***; (mind-doors-adverting) ***cakkhusamphassajā*** feeling is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE15
