PAGE17 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

1. In  four  immaterial  realms  called  ***catuvokāra***  (=four-groups-existence),  only  mental concomitants arise due to compatible consciousness but not corporealities at all the time both during ***paṭisandhi*** and during life. 
1. In  five-groups-existence  (***pañncavokāra  bhumi***),  two-fivefold-consciousness  cannot produce CPM (***cittajarūpa***) during life. According to ***Mūlaṭīkā Sayadaw***, all kinds of death-consciousness cannot produce CPM (***cittajarūpa***). (***Mūlaṭī***-***1-152***). Therefore only mental concomitants can arise but not corporealities, due to compatible consciousness called  two-fivefold-consciousness.  According  to  ***Mūlaṭīkā  Sayadaw***,  compatible consciousness called death-consciousness can also produce mental concomitant only but not corporealities. However CPK (***kammajarūpa***), CPT (***utujarūpa***), CPN (***āhārajarūpa***) are still arising at the moment of fivefold consciousness although CPM ( ***cittajarūpa***) do not  arise.  If  those  corporealities  are  also  kept  in  mind  minglingly  through  inevitable method,  there  would  be  no  disadvantage.  [Those  fivefold  consciousness  benefit corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  which  are  produced  at  five-doors-adverting consciousness,  which  are  still  reaching  into  static  phase  (***ṭhitikāla***),  by  means  of efficiency of relation of post-compatibility (***pacchājāta*** ***paccaya***).] 
1. In the realm of mindless beings, only corporealities called vital nonads  corporeal units (***jīvitanavaka  kalāpa***)  arise both  during ***paṭisandhi***  and  during  life,  due  to  the  fourth absorption,  according  to  tetrad  method  (***catukka  naya***):  due  to  the  fourth  absorption, according to pentad methos (***pañcakanaya***), called fine-material wholesome formation which had been cultivated in previous life adjacent to realm of mindless being. Mentality never arise in this realm. 
1. In five-groups-existences, consequence mental ***dhammas***, the first life-continuum after ***paṭisandhi*** and consequence corporeal ***dhammas*** produced by ***kamma***, of present life, arise  during  life,  due  to  action  (=action  potential  consciousness)  which  had  been cultivated in previous life. Corporealities produced by ***kamma*** can arise due to other kind of action out of those actions which can produced consequence corporeality-mentality, that  life-continuum  etc.  Thus  during  arising  of  consequence  consciousness,  life- continuum etc.\_\_\_\_\_ 

There would be two kinds of CPK (***kammajarūpa***), i.e., 

1) corporealities produced by ***kamma*** which can produce consequence consciousness, life- continuum etc., 
1) corporealities  produced  by  other  kind  of  ***kamma***  which  is  out  of  that  ***kamma***.  For instance, various bad consequences of the supreme Buddha should be taken as object. 

***Pāli Quotation* –(*Abhi-A-*1-307)** 

All  ***bodhisatta***  (=future  the  Supreme  Buddha  with  Knowledge  of  Omniscience) always take ***paṭisandhi*** (= process of newly occurrence of next existence, NONE) with the first  great  consequence  consciousness,  joyful  with  three  roots,  unprepared, (***somanassasahajāta tihetuka asańkhārika mahāvipāka citta***) which is produced by the first great wholesome volition with knowledge, unprepared, which is predominated with loving- kindness (***mettā***) and agreeable feeling. (***Abhi-A-1-307***) 

**PAGE-465** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE17

Then the Supreme Buddha had got headache and sprain back. During headache and sprain  back,  unwholesome  consequence  consciousness  with  bodily  disagreeable  feeling (***dukkha sahagata akusalavipāka*** ***viññāņa***) and unwholesome CPK (***kammajarūpa***) arise simultaneously. The headache of the Supreme Buddha was due to unwholesome action which was very glad to see numerous fishes caught by relatives during existing as mankind who was ***bodhisatta*** in fishers village. The sprain back was due to unwholesome action which had been performed by breaking another boxer’s back during boxing-match in one previous life of ***bodhisatta*** as a champion boxer. 

While  unwholesome  consequence  mental  ***dhammas***  and  unwholesome  CPK (***kammajarūpa***) were arising due to those unwholesome actions, those CPK were also arising apparently due to great wholesome action predominated with loving-kindness as mentioned above.  It  is  noticeable  the  fact  that  (32)  kinds  of  Noble  Gentleman’s  characters  were occurring obviously without disappearing at that time. 

Furthermore while consequence mental ***dhammas***, life-continuum etc., and CPK were arising  due  to  that  great  wholesome  action  predominated  with  loving-kindness  (=action potential consciousness called ***kamma*** ***viññāņa***), on the other hand, those CPK which were occurring through the state of headache, sprain back, were also occurring obviously. During occurring  consequence  mental  ***dhammas***,  life-continuum  etc.,  unwholesome  CPK  were possible to arise although unwholesome consequence consciousness with bodily disagreeable feeling (***dukkha sahagata akusala vipāka viññāņa***) were impossible to arise. 

Therefore both unwholesome consequence CPK (***kammajarūpa***) which were possible to arise while wholesome consequence consciousness mental ***dhammas***, life-continuum etc were arising and wholesome consequence CPK (***kammajarūpa***) which were possible to arise while  unwholesome  consequence  consciousness  mental  ***dhammas***  were  arising,  are  only corporeal ***dhammas*** produced by action potential consciousness (***kammaviññāņa***). This is how mere corporealities arise due to action potential consciousness.  

Furthermore as consequence mental ***dhammas***, life-continuum etc., and wholesome CPK arose due to great wholesome volition predominated with loving- kindness (=action potential  consciousness)  in  the  continuum  of  the  Supreme  Buddha,  similarly\_\_\_\_\_  other kinds of wholesome consequence consciousness mental ***dhammas*** and wholesome CPK or corporealities  produced  by  temperature  (CPT)  which  were  supported  by  ***kamma*** (***kammapaccaya*** ***utujarūpa***) were also possible to arise accordingly due to other kinds of wholesome actions during life. 

For  instance\_\_\_\_\_   Due  to  wholesome  action  (=  action  potential  consciousness  )  called cleaning  grass,  spreading  sand,  sprinkling,  offering  miniature  paper  umbrella  used  as offertory and pennant on flat ground around the pagoda and on the pagoda with relies of the Supreme  ***Pacceka  buddha***  called  ***Susima***  after  final  death  of  that  ***Pacceka  buddha***,  the Supreme Buddha was worshipped by dragons, human beings, heaving beings, ***brahma***s along with the journey from ***Rājagaha*** to ***Vesāli*** for noble preaching of ***Ratana Sutta***. 

While consequence mental ***dhammas*** and CPK were arising due to another kinds of actions, excluding great wholesome action predominated with loving-kindness, there were possible to arise only CPK, due to action potential consciousness called that great wholesome action  predominated  with  loving-kindness.  Similarly\_\_\_\_\_  While  consequence  mental ***dhammas***,  life-continuum  etc.,  were  arising,  only  CPK  were  possible  to  arise  but  not 
PAGE17
PAGE19 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

consequence mental ***dhammas***, due to another kinds of wholesome actions. Those CPK are also only corporeal ***dhammas*** produced by previous action potential consciousness. These are how mere corporealities arise due to consciousness (***viññāņa***). 

**PAGE-466** 

By  following  above  examples  it  should  be  understood  similarly  on  how  mere corporealities arise, in the continuum of the righteous person due to consciousness in the continuum of the righteous person. 

Furthermore  during  entering  into  the  Cessation  –Absorption  (***nirodha  samāpatti***), consciousness, mental concomitants and CPM (***cittajarūpa***) are ceasing but CPK, CPT, CPN only  are  occurring.  At  that  time  it  is  only  the  period  of  mere  corporeal  ***dhammas***  are occurring, due to past action potential consciousness, during life in five-groups-existences. (***Mūlaṭī-2-115, Mahāṭī-2-319***) 

Furthermore,  the  Supreme  Buddha  entered  into  the  Fruition-Absorption  (***arahatta phalasamāpatti***)  through  way  of  corporeal  septad  (  ***rūpasattaka***),  non-corporeal  septad (***arūpa*** ***sattaka***) in order to remove disagreeable feeling adjacent to death, as the beginning of full moon day of wazo, 10 months before final death-consciousness. During those impulsions of ***vipassanā*** practice, both corporealities produced by great wholesome action predominated by loving-kindness, corporealities produced by other wholesome actions and corporealities produced by unwholesome action which arose through state of sprain back were arising in the continuum of the Supreme Buddha. Those CPK were also only corporeal ***dhammas*** which arose due to past action potential consciousness. This is how mere corporeality arise due to consciousness. 

5. ***yañca pañcavokārabhave sabbattha viññāņa paccayā nāmarūpam, (Abhi-A-2-163, Vs- 2- 194)***  

***sabbatthāti paṭisandhiyam pavattee ca.*** 

***sahajāta  viññāņapaccayā  nāmarūpam,  kamma  viññāņapaccayā  ca  nāmarūpañca yathāsambhavam yojetabbam. (Mūlaṭī-2-115)*** 

Both during ***paṭisandhi*** and during life (***pavatti***) in five-groups-existence,  

1) due to compatible consciousness of present life, both mental concomitant (=mind) and CPM (***cittajarūpa***) can arise: 
1) due  to  action  potential  consciousness  (***kammaviññāņa***)  cultivated  in  past  lives,  both consequence mental ***dhammas*** and CPK (***kammajarūpa***) can arise. 

Mental ***dhammas*** produced by  compatible  consciousness  are  mental  concomitants (=mind)  and  corporeal  ***dhammas*** produced by  that  consciousness  are  CPM  only.  Mental ***dhammas***  produced  by  action  potential  consciousness  are  all  kinds  of  consequence consciousness,  mental  concomitants  (=  mind)  and  corporeal  ***dhammas***  produced  by  that consciousness are CPK only. Those ***dhammas*** produced by post-compatible consciousness (***pacchājāta***  ***viññāņa***)  are  preceding  corporeal  ***dhammas***  produced  by  four  origins  only. (Please See ***Mūlaṭī-2-115***) 

In accordance with above explanations— 

1. There are relations that mere matter (corporeality) arises due to consciousness: 

2200 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

2. mere mind (mentality) arises due to consciousness: 
2. both mind-matter arise due to consciousness. 

Therefore  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  it  was  preached  as  “***viññāņa***  ***paccayā*** ***nāmarūpam***  =  due  to  arising  of  consciousness,  mind-matter  arise”  through  preaching methodology called ***ekadesa sarūpekasesa naya*** = words with partial similarity in form are designated collectively as one word, i.e., ***nāmañca rūpañca nāmarūpañca nāmarūpam*** = both mind, matter, and mind-matter are designated collectively as mind-matter. (***Abhi-A-2- 163, Vs-2-194***) 

**PAGE-467** 

***ekadesa  sarūpekasesa\_\_\_\_***  It  means  that  among  three  words  called  ***nāmañca,  rūpañca, nāmarūpañca***, both ***nāmam*** (mind) and ***rūpam*** (matter) which are partially similar to the third, ***nāmarūpa***m, are cancelled out to remain one word (***ekasesa***) resulting in designating as ***nāmarūpam*** (mind-matter) collectively. 

In  accordance  with  above  explanations,  it  will  be  continued  to  present  way  of discerning how mind-matter arise due to three kinds of consciousness called action potential consciousness  (***kamma***  ***viññāņa***),  compatible  consciousness  (***sahajātaviññāņa***),  post- compatible consciousness (***pacchājāta*** ***viññāņa***). Previously the righteous ***meditator*** should like  to  discern  only  how  present  life’s  mind-matter  arise  due  to  various  kinds  of consciousness. Only when the penetrative knowledge can be sent toward successive previous lives and successive future lives, can he discern how each matter, each mind, each mind- matter  arise,  due  to  respective  consciousness  in  various  lives,  woeful  existence,  human existence,  heavenly  existence,  ***brahma***  existence  etc,  respectively.  Causal  and  resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind for each coming-into-existence respectively, such as, for during life of mindless being, how corporealities arose due to super-formation consciousness: for  during  life  of  Immaterial  sphere,  how  mentality  arose  due  to  action  potential consciousness and compatible consciousness (***sahajāta*** ***viññāņa***): for during life of human being,  heavenly  being,  ***brahma***,  how  mind-matter  arose  due  to  action  potential consciousness,  compatible  consciousness  and  post-compatible  consciousness  (***pacchājāta*** ***viññāņa***) etc. 

**2.6.5. A. *vinñāņa paccayā nāmarūpam*** 

**(i) How mind-matter arise due to action potential consciousness (*kamma* *viññāņa*)** 

With  regarding  to  the  term,  ***kamma***  ***viññāņa***,  the  consciousness  associating  with super-formations ( = wholesome and unwholesome formations) which had been cultivated in past  lives  must  be  inferred.  With  regarding  to  the  term,  ***nāma***  (=  mind),  wholesome consequence mental ***dhammas*** or unwholesome consequence mental ***dhammas*** which are produced  by  those  wholesome  formations  or  unwholesome  formations,  must  be  inferred accordingly. With regarding to the term, ***rūpam*** (=matter), wholesome CPK (***kammajarūpa***) which are produced by wholesome formations and unwholesome CPK which are produced by unwholesome formations must be inferred accordingly. 

Discerning on how mind-matter arise due to wholesome formation consciousness would be presented previously. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how consequence mind-matter arise  due to past action potential consciousness as follows:  

1. Due to arising of past action potential consciousness, ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter arise. Past action potential consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter are resultant ***dhammas***. 
1. Due to arising of past action potential consciousness, ***bhavanga*** mind-matter arise. Past action potential consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** mind-matter are resultant ***dhammas***. 
1. Due to arising of past action potential consciousness, ***cuti*** mind-matter arise. Past action potential consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; ***cuti*** mind-matter are resultant ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-468** 

[Notes:   These are way of discerning on three kinds of consciousness which are free from cognitive process (***vīthimutta citta***). If action potential consciousness is superior joyful great wholesome deed with three roots (***tihetuka ukkaṭṭha somanassa mahā kusala***), it consists of (34) mental ***dhammas*** which are belonging to mind-door cognitive process. Those mental ***dhammas*** must be discerned in order to break down each kind of compactness (***ghana***) up to ultimate nature by insight knowledge. If ***paṭisandhi***-***bhavanga***-***cuti*** are also joyful kinds with three roots (***tihetuka somanassa***), those consist of (34) mental ***dhammas*** respectively. Those mental  ***dhammas***  must  also  be  kept  in  mind  after  breaking  down  each  compactness. Corporeal ***dhammas*** are CPK (***kammajarūpa***) but all kinds of corporealities produced by four origin must be discerned according to inevitable method. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing the nature of causal relationship between ultimate ***dhammas***. Now discerning on consequence mind-matter occurring in cognitive processes, due to action potential consciousness, would be presented as a trace.] 

**Examples of way of discerning as a whole** 

1. Due to arising of past action potential consciousness, consequence mind-matter of seeing- consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness,  registering- consciousness arise. 

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  consequence  mind-matter  of seeing-consciousness, receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness, registering- consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

2. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  consequence  mind-matter  of hearing-consciousness, receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness, registering- consciousness arise. 

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  consequence  mind-matter  of hearing-consciousness, receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness, registering- consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

3. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  consequence  mind-matter  of smelling-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness, registering-consciousness arise. 

2222 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  consequence  mind-matter  of smelling-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness, registering-consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

4. Due to arising of past action potential consciousness, consequence mind-matter of tasting- consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness,  registering- consciousness arise. 

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  consequence  mind-matter  of tasting-consciousness, receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness, registering- consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

5. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  consequence  mind-matter  of touching-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness, registering-consciousness arise. 

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  consequence  mind-matter  of touching-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness, registering-consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

6. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  consequence  mind-matter  of registering-consciousness arise. 

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  consequence  mind-matter  of registering-consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

[Notes:\_\_\_\_\_  Wholesome  and  unwholesome  consciousness,  which  are  associating  with present formations and actions cultivated for the purpose of attainment of any kind of future coming-  into-existences,  are  also  action  potential  consciousness  (***kammaviññāņa***).  The causal relationship how consequence mind-matter, such as ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter of future coming-into-existence, arise due to those present life action potential consciousness, must also be discerned. However that way of discerning is inclusive in the way of discerning called ***bhava*** ***paccayā*** ***jāti*** (= due to arising of ***kamma*** coming-into-existence, birth arises). During discerning as a whole, all kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of wholesome groups and unwholesome groups shown in each row of tables of ***nāmakammaṭṭhaņā*** for eye-door cognitive process, mind-door cognitive process etc., must be discerned thoroughly. During discerning in that way two kinds of registering-consciousness, i.e., registering-consciousness consisting in eye- door  cognitive  process  and  succeeding  mind-door  cognitive  process,  must  be  discerned thoroughly.  It  should  be  recognized  similarly  on  remaining  doors.  However  way  of discerning separately as follows can improve clear under standing.] 

**PAGE-469** 

**Examples of way of discerning as separately-** 

1. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  mind-matter  of  seeing- consciousness arise.   

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  mind-matter  of  seeing- consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

2. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  mind-matter  of  receiving- consciousness arise.   

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  mind-matter  of  receiving- consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

3. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  mind-matter  of  investigating- consciousness arise.   

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  mind-matter  of  investigating- consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

4. Due  to  arising  of  past  action  potential  consciousness,  mind-matter  of  registering- consciousness arise.   

Past  action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  mind-matter  of  registering- consciousness are resultant ***dhammas***. 

So far as this extent it can be understood easily. Both wholesome and unwholesome groups of each row shown in tables, must be discerned thoroughly. Remaining doors, ear- door  cognitive  process  etc.,  must  be  discerned  in  similar  way.  As  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas***  are  kept  in  mind  by  seeing  how  mind-matter  arise  due  to  wholesome  action potential consciousness cultivated in past lives, similarly\_\_\_\_\_ causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how mind-matter arise due to unwholesome action potential consciousness cultivated in those past lives. Similarly the relationship between arising of consequence mind-matter and the wholesome action other than definite action which can produce consequence mind-matter, i.e., ***paṭisandhi***, ***bhavanga*** etc., can also be discerned in this stage. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind thoroughly. 

***(ii) viññāņa paccayā rūpam*** (= due to arising of consciousness, matter arises) ***Pāli Quotation* (*Abhi-A-*2-163, Vs-2-194) (*Mūlaṭī*-2-115, *Mahāṭī*-2-319)** 

As mentioned above, while past wholesome or unwholesome actions, other than past actions  which  can  produce  consequence  mind,  produce  its  consequence,  only  matter  is produced  by  past  action  potential  consciousness.  During  entering  into  the  Cessation- Absorption  (***nirodha  samāpatti***),  only  matter  is  produced  by  past  action  potential consciousness.  In  five-groups-existences,  during  life,  while  five-doors-adverting- consciousness,  determining-consciousness,  impulsions  are  occurring,  out  of  arising  of consequence consciousness, ***bhavanga*** etc., within five-doors-cognitive processes and while mind-door-adverting-consciousness,  impulsions  are  occurring  within  mind-door-cognitive process,  only  matter  (=***kammajarūpa***,  CPK  only)  is  produced  by  past  action  potential consciousness really. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-115, Mahāṭī-2-319***) 

**PAGE-470** 

The phenomenon of arising of matter due to action potential consciousness during Cessation-Absorption, actually, does not concern with the worldling ***meditator***. Therefore there would be two sections for discerning how pure matter arises due to consciousness. 

1. While consequence mind-matter, such as life-continuum (death) fivefold consciousness, receiving, investigating, registering consciousness etc., are arising due to any kind of past action potential consciousness, CPK (***kammajarūpa***) can also be produced due to wholesome or  unwholesome  actions  cultivated  in  past  lives,  other  than  that  action  potential 

2244 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

consciousness.  By  seeing  how  CPK  (***kammajarūpa***)  arise  due  to  that  other  action\_\_\_\_\_ causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to arising of action potential consciousness, CPK (***kammajarūpa***) arise. Action potential consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; CPK (***kammajarūpa***) are resultant ***dhammas***. 

2. While five-doors-adverting consciousness, determining-consciousness, impulsions, mind- door-adverting  consciousness  and  impulsions  are  arising,  CPK  (***kammajarūpa***)  are  also arising due to wholesome consciousness called wholesome formation (***puññābhisańkhāra***) and other wholesome or unwholesome action potential consciousness. 

[During discerning on this way of practice it should not be forgotten on explanations found in scriptures that CPK are always arising every three-time-phases called ***uppada, ṭhiti, bhanga*** of every mind-moment throughout life from ***paṭisandhi*** up to 17th mind-moment counted backward  from  death  consciousness.]  By  seeing  arising  of  CPK  at  moment  of  those consciousness  called  five-doors-adverting,  determining,  impulsions,  mind-door-adverting, impulsions\_\_\_\_\_ causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to arising of past action potential consciousness, CPK (***kammajarūpa***) arise past action  potential  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  CPK  (***kammajarūpa***)  are  resultant ***dhammas***. 

If these number (1) and (2) ways of discerning are connected to each other, it can be concluded  that  in  five-groups-existence,  during  life,  the  phenomena  of  arising  of  CPK (***kammajarūpa***) due to past action potential consciousness can be discerned and kept in mind during occurring both life-continuum and cognitive process mind moment. However way of inferring the basic meaning of action potential consciousness (***kamma*** ***viññāņa***) and CPK (***kammajarūpa***) must be recognized separately as mentioned above. 

Therefore after keeping in mind pure CPK during life-continuum, the phenomena of arising  of  pure  matter  called  ***kammajarūpa***  due  to  respective  past  action  potential consciousness in various mind-moments of cognitive processes, eye-door-cognitive process etc., can be kept in mind in sequence in order to recognize easily on arising of each pure CPK due to arising of respective past action potential consciousness. Furthermore if one righteous ***meditator*** can see an experience of coming-into-existence as mindless being in any one of previous lives, causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how pure matter called vital nonads arose due to fine-material wholesome formations called fourth absorption or fifth absorption of fine-material sphere. 

**PAGE-471** 

(iii) ***viññāņapaccayāa*** ***nāmam*** 

***yam  āruppe  pavattipaṭisandhisu,  pañcavokārabhave  ca  pavattiyam  viññāņapaccayā nāmameva. (Abhi-A-2- 163, Vs-2-194)*** 

If the righteous ***meditator*** had experienced as ***paṭisandhi*** of Immaterial Sphere in any one of previous lives, only mind called four mental aggregates can be arisen due to action potential consciousness called unshakable wholesome formation (***ānenjābhisańkhāra***) at that time. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing phenomena of arising of mentality only, due to that action potential consciousness. 

However phenomenon of arising of only (7)  kinds of mental concomitants which always  associate  with  every  mind-moment  (***sabbacitta  sāadhāraņa***),  due  to  fivefold- consciousness  (***pañca  viññāņa***),  must  be  kept  in  mind  for  present  life.  Those  mental concomitants and each fivefold consciousness are arising simultaneously within same mind moment. 

Those  fivefold  consciousness  are,  therefore  designated  as  compatible  consciousness (***sahajāta*** ***viññāņa***) because they arise simultaneously with resultant mental concomitants. This way of discerning must, therefore, be performed together with the section of compatible consciousness. Those fivefold consciousness can not produce CPM (***cittajarūpa***) but mind called mental concomitants only. It should be recognized similarly on death-consciousness. It can be said appropriately that in five-groups existence, both kinds of mind-matter always arise due to action potential consciousness. (***Mūlaṭī-2-115***) 

**(iv) Formations and *kamma* coming-into-existence (*kammabhava*) (= action)** 

In this stage of knowledge of Discerning Cause and condition (***paccaya pariggaha ñāņa***), causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing the nature of relationship between efficiency of relation of asynchronous action ***nānakkhaņika*** ***kamma*** ***pacaya***) and consequence mind-matter. During performing ***vipassanā*** practice, however, that efficiency of action (***kamma***) is not suitable to be discerned as object of ***vipassanā*** practice through three general  characters  and  then  it  should  be  recognized  on  significant  difference  between formations (***sańkhāra***) and ***kamma*** coming-into-existence (=action). 

1. When various functions of wholesome deeds and unwholesome deeds are performed the volition (***cetanā***) which arises before accomplishment of the function is designated as formation (***sańkhāra***). The after-volition (***muñca*** ***cetanā***) which has been accomplished the function, (=it is also called ***sinnaṭṭhapaka cetanā***) is designated as ***kamma*** coming- into-existence (***kammabhava***). 
1. In the next method\_\_\_\_\_ the volitions which are associating with preceding (6) times of impulsions of all cognitive processes which are occurring while various wholesome and unwholesome  deeds  are  performing,  are  designated  as  formations.  The  volition associating with seventh impulsion is designated as ***kamma*** coming-into- existence. 
1. In the next method\_\_\_\_ all consciousness and mental concomitants which are associating with  wholesome  volitions  or  unwholesome  volitions  occurring  in  all  impulsions,  are designated  as  formations.  Every  wholesome  volition  or  unwholesome  volition  is designated  as  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence.  This  is  significant  difference  between formations and ***kamma*** coming-into-existence. (***Abhi-A-2-182-183***) 

**PAGE-472** 

According to this definition\_\_\_\_\_ if those continuities of consciousness of cognitive processes which are consisting in before, during and after performing various wholesome or unwholesome deeds, can be kept in mind by breaking down each compactness of mentality, both  two  kinds,  formations  and  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  are  accomplished  to  be discerned  as  objects  of  ***vipassanā***  practice.  These  formations  and  ***kamma***  coming-into- existence are suitable to be discerned as objects of ***vipassanā*** practice indeed. 

2266 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

**2.6.5. B Examples of way of discerning on phenomena of arising of compatible mind- matter, due   to compatible consciousness** 

In  the  relation  called  ***viññāņapaccaya***  ***nāmarūpam***,  if  the  term,  ***viññāņa***  (= consciousness),is inferred as the past action potential consciousness (***kammaviññāņa***), the term,  ***nāma***  (=mind)  which  consists  in  the  words  ***nāmarūpam***  (mind-matter),  must  be inferred as consequence consciousness and mental concomitants (= all mental ***dhammas***). If the  term,  ***viññāņa***  (=consciousness),  is  inferred  as  compatible  consciousness  which  is inclusive in present life and it it associating with the resultant mental ***dhammas***, the term, consequence  ***nāma***  (=mind),  must  be  inferred  as  only  mental  concomitants  which  are associating with that compatible consciousness. The term, consequence ***rūpa*** (=matter), must be inferred as only corporealities produced by mind (CPM) (=***cittajarūpa***) through significant method (***padhānanaya***). All kinds of corporealities produced by four origins can be discerned indiscriminately  as  objects  of  ***vipassanā***  practice  through  inevitable  method (***avinābhāvanaya***).  Among  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  which  are  associating and arising within one mind moment, this section is the way of preaching how consciousness benefits both mental concomitants and CPM. In this section of compatible consciousness it must, therefore, be inferred on not only consequence consciousness but also all kinds of wholesome, unwholesome, consequence, indifferent consciousness and then the term, ***nāma*** (=mind), must be inferred on all associating mental concomitants accordingly. 

Furthermore,  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  only  mind  arises  due  to  fivefold consciousness because fivefold consciousness can not produce corporeality. Consciousness, mental concomitants and CPM which are arising simultaneously within one mind-moment must be seen by insight knowledge previously. Then the phenomenon how associating mental concomitants arise due to leadership of consciousness and the phenomenon how CPM arise due  to  those  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  must  be  scrutinized  again.  After knowing and seeing by penetrative knowledge called eye of wisdom causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows. 

1. Due to arising of ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness, ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter arise. ***Paṭisandhi*** consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter are resultant ***dhammas***. (mind= (33) kinds of mental concomitants; matter – (30) kinds of CPK, ***kammajarūpa***). 
1. Due to arising of life-continuum consciousness, life-continuum mind-matter arise. Life- continuum consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; life-continuum  mind-matter are resultant ***dhammas***. (mind = (33) kinds of mental concomitants; matter = CPM, ***cittajarūpa***) 
1. Due  to  arising  of  death  consciousness,  death  mentality  arise.  Death  consciousness  is causal ***dhamma***; death mentality are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According to another opinion of teachers of other thought, death-consciousness can also produce CPM, ***cittajarūpa***) 

These are ways of discerning on those consciousness which are free from cognitive processes. Ways of discerning on those consciousness of cognitive processes are as follows: 

1. Due  to  arising  of  “five-doors-adverting”  consciousness,  “five-doors-adverting  mind- matter” arise. 

“Five-doors-adverting”  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  “five-doors-adverting  mind- matter” are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(mind = (10) kinds of mental concomitants; matter = CPM, ***cittajarūpa***) 

**PAGE-473** 

2. Due to arising of “seeing” consciousness, “seeing-consciousness mentality” arise. “Seeing”  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  “seeing-consciousness  mentality”  are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(mind = (7) kinds of mental ***dhammas***)  

Remaining  fivefold  consciousness,  i.e.,  hearing-consciousness,  smelling- consciousness,  tasting-consciousness,  touching-consciousness,  must  also  be  discerned  in similar way. 

3. Due to arising of “receiving” consciousness, “receiving mind-matter” arise. 

“Receiving”  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  “receiving  mind-matter”  are  resultant ***dhammas***. 

(mind = (10) kinds of mental concomitants, matter = CPM.) 

4. Due to arising of “investigating” consciousness, “investigating mind-matter” arise. “Investigating”  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  “investigating  mind-matter”  are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(mind = (11) or (10) kinds  of mental concomitants, matter = CPM.) 

5. Due to arising of “determining” consciousness, “determining mind-matter” arise. “Determining” consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; “determining mind-matter” are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(mind = (11) kinds of mental conscomitants, matter = CPM.) 

6. Due to arising of “impulsion” consciousness, “impulsion mind-matter” arise. 

“Impulsion”  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  “impulsion  mind-matter”  are  resultant ***dhammas***. 

(mind = associating mental concomitants must be inferred accordingly, matter = CPM.) 

7. Due to arising of “registering” consciousness, “registering mind-matter” arise. “Registering” consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; “registering mind-matter” are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(mind = associating mental concomitants must be inferred accordingly, matter = CPM.) 

Both wholesome groups and unwholesome groups for all (6) lines must be discerned thoroughly. As shown in tables of ***nāmakammaṭṭhāna***, Volume II, numbers of associating mental  concomitants  of  investigating,  impulsions  and  registering  consciousness  must  be inferred accordingly. 

All (7) mind moments of impulsions and (2) mind-moments of registering must be discerned thoroughly. As shown in tables, all mind-moments must be scrutinized in order to be kept in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** systematically. 

5. **C How matter arises due to arising of post compatible consciousness.** 

2288 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

From the beginning of the first life-continuum (***bhavanga***) all consciousness of both cognitive process and free from cognitive process benefit and support corporealities produced by four origins, which arise simultaneously with preceding mind moments of themselves, which are still reaching into the static phase (***ṭhitikāla***), in order to continue to exist before perishing phase (***bhangakkhaņa***), by means of efficiency of relation of post-compatibility (***pacchājāta*** ***paccaya***). Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows by seeing this nature by insight knowledge. 

\1.  Due to arising of post-compatible consciousness, corporealities arise. 

Post-compatible consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; corporealities are resultant ***dhammas***. 

As shown in tables of ***nāmakammaṭṭhāna***, Volume II, causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by dividing at least two times, i.e., once for eye-door-cognitive process and once for the following mind-door-cognitive process in each row of tables. 

**PAGE-474** 

Both wholesome and unwholesome groups of (6) lines must be discerned thoroughly. For instance\_\_\_\_\_ 

due  to  arising  of  post-compatible  consciousness  of  eye-door  cognitive  process, corporealities arise. 

Post-compatible consciousness of eye-door-cognitive process are causal ***dhammas***; corporealities  are  resultant ***dhammas***.  This  way  of  discerning  is  on  the  whole.  However separate discerning on each mind-moment is better and it can improve clear understanding: 

**Way of separate discerning on each mind-moment**  

1. Due to arising of post-compatible life-continuum consciousness, corporealities arise. Post-compatible  life-continuum  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  corporealities  are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(Life-continuum may be any kind of ***bhavanga*** consciousness, the first life-continuum after ***paṭisandhi*** etc, while matters are all kinds of corporealities produced by four origins which  arise  simultaneously  with  preceding  consciousness  of  itself,  ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness etc, which are still reaching into the static phase called ***ṭhitikāla***.) 

2. Due  to  arising  of  post-compatible  five-doors-adverting  consciousness,  corporealities arise. 

Post-compatible five-doors-adverting consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; corporealities are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(Matters  are  all  kinds  of  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  which  arise simultaneously with life-continuum (interruption) that is previous mind-moment itself, which are reaching into static phase.) 

3. Due to arising of post-compatible seeing consciousness, corporealities arise. Post-compatible  seeing  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  corporealities  are  resultant ***dhammas***. 

(Matters  are  all  kinds  of  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  which  arise simultaneously  with  five-doors-adverting  consciousness,  which  are  still  reaching  into static phase.) 

4. Due to arising of post-compatible receiving consciousness, corporealities arise. Post-compatible receiving consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; corporealities are resultant ***dhammas***. (Matters are three kinds of corporealities produced by three origins (tija***rūpa***), i.e., CPK, CPT,  CPN.  Five-doors-adverting  consciousness  can  not  produce  CPM  (***cittajarūpa***) resulting in lacking this kind for resultant ***dhammas***.) 
4. Due to arising of post-compatible investigating consciousness, corporealities arise. Post-compatible  investigating  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  corporealities  are resultant ***dhammas***. (Matters  are  all  kinds  of  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  which  arise simultaneously with receiving-consciousness.) 
4. Due to arising of post-compatible determining consciousness, corporealities arise. Post-compatible  determining  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  corporealities  are resultant ***dhammas***. (Matters  are  all  kinds  of  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  which  arise simultaneously with investigating-consciousness.) 
4. Due to arising of post-compatible first impulsion consciousness, corporealities arise. Post-compatible  first  impulsion  consciousness  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  corporealities  are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(Matters  are  all  kinds  of  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  which  arise simultaneously with determining-consciousness.) 

**PAGE-475** 

8. Due to arising of post-compatible second impulsion consciousness, corporealities arise. Post-compatible second impulsion consciousness is causal ***dhamma***; corporealities are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(Matters  are  all  kinds  of  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  which  arise simultaneously with first impulsion consciousness.) 

So far as this extent, way of discerning can be easily understood. Every corporeal ***dhamma***, which arises simultaneously with preceding consciousness of itself, which is still reaching into static phase, is benefited by succeeding consciousness through efficiency of relation  of  post-compatibility  (***pacchājāta***  ***paccaya***).  Both  wholesome  and  unwholesome groups of (6) lines must be discerned thoroughly. 

6. ***paccaya*naya = efficiency of relation** 
1. Consequence consciousness benefits for arising of associating three mental aggregates (which are mingling with corporealities in five-groups-existence but not mingling with corporealities in four-groups-existence) by means of efficiency of (9) kinds of relations, viz.,  compatibility  (***sahajāta***),  mutuality  (***aññāmaññña***),  dependence  (***nissaya***), association (***sampayutta***), ***kamma***-consequence  (***vipāka***), nutriment  (***āhāra***),controlling 

3300 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

faculty (***indriya***), presence (***atthi***), non-disappearance (***avigata***) both during ***paṭisandhi*** and during life. 

2. During ***paṭisandhi***, ***paṭisandhi*** consequence consciousness benefits for arising of heart- base (***hdaya vatthu***) by means of efficiency of (9) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence, ***kamma***-consequence, nutriment, controlling faculty, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. 
2. During  ***paṭisandhi***,  that  ***paṭisandhi***  consequence  consciousness  benefits  for  arising  of remaining kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** (= 29 kinds) by means of efficiency of (8) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, dependence, ***kamma***-consequence, nutriment, controlling, faculty, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. (***Abhi-A-2-163, Vs-2-195)*** 
2. Super-formation consciousness (***abhisańkhāra*** ***viññāņa***) (= ***kamma*** ***viññāņa***) benefits for arising  of  corporeality  of  mindless  being  and  CPK  (***kammajarūpa***)  of  five-groups- existence by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence (***upanissaya***) only according to preaching methodology of ***Suttanta*** method (= periphrasis method). (***Abhi-A-2-163, Vs-2-195***) 

[It should be noticeable fact that consciousness is never preached as efficiency of relation of asynchronous action ( ***nanakkhaņika kamma*** ***paccaya***) but volition (***cetanā***) only is preached through that kind of relation.] 

***Suttantikapariyāya* (periphrasis method found in *Suttanta*)\_\_\_\_** 

In the preaching of Conditional Relations (***paṭṭhāna***) it was not preached the fact Super-formation-consciousness  benefits  corporeal  ***dhammas***  by  means  of  efficiency  of relation of natural determinative dependence (***pakatūpanissaya paccaya***). In the preaching methodology of ***Suttanta***, however, it is preached in a way that\_\_\_\_ "***yasamimsati yam hoti, asatica na hoti, so tassa upanissayo nidānam hetupabhavo”*** = if such causal ***dhamma*** is present, such resultant ***dhamma*** arises, if such causal ***dhamma*** is not present, such resultant ***dhamma*** does not arise, that causal ***dhamma*** is the relation of determinative dependence of that  resultant  ***dhamma***  indeed;  it  is  the  origin,  the  fundamental  factor,  primary  cause indeed.”, By means of bearing in mind in this way, it is preached the fact “***viññāņūpanisam nāmarūpam***  =  mind-matter  has  got  the  relation  of  determinative  dependence  called consciousness,”  resulting  in  preaching  in  a  way  that  matter  has  also  got  the  relation  of determinative dependence called consciousness. 

Furthermore, in the preaching of ***vanapattha*** (= praise on forest), it was preached on the fact dwelling with four kinds of deportments called ***iriyāpatha vihāra***, which have the relation of determinative dependence with forest, village, hamlet, town, person. 

**PAGE-476** 

It  is  worth  preaching  in  a  way  that  due  to  presence  of  dwelling  with  those deportments, paraphernalia, robe etc, which are protection of life would be attained either grudgingly  or  not-grudgingly.  Furthermore  forest  etc,  never  approach  to  occurrence  of relations of object-determinative dependence (***ārammaņūpanissaya***), natural determinative dependence  (***pakatūpanissaya***)  for  arising  of  either  deportments  or  robe  etc.  It  should, therefore, be recognized only non-occurrence without cause is the relation of determinative dependence through preaching methodology of ***Suttanta***. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-116***) 

Those  consequence  mental  ***dhammas***  called  ***paṭisandhi***,  life-contunuum,  death- consciousness always take any object of three kinds called action-emblem of action-emblem of destination (***kamma*** -***kamma*** ***nimitta-gatinimitta***) as natural fixed law. 

If mental ***dhammas*** of ***paṭisandhi*** takes the object of action (***kamma***) it is the same situation to be said as it takes the object of super-formation consciousness (***abhisańkhāraviññāņa***). When  mental  ***dhammas***  of  ***paṭisandhi***  arise  by  taking  the  object  of  super-formation- consciousness  called  action,  the  action  so  called  super-format-consciousness  benefits  for arising of mentality of ***paṭisandhi***. It is very obvious fact without necessity to say any more, resulting in explaining in the commentary that only the matter is benefited by the efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only through preaching methodology of ***Suttanta***. It is right.\_\_\_\_ It should be recognized the fact if it is said on uncertain phenomenon that “super-formation consciousness is the causal ***dhamma*** of corporeal ***dhamma***,” it would be not necessity to say the certain phenomenon that “that super-formation consciousness is the causal ***dhamma*** of mental ***dhamma*** also”. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-116***) 

5. All  kinds  of  consciousness  from  the  beginning  of  the  first  life-continuum  after ***paṭisandhi***,  excluding  super-formation-consciousness  (=  every  consciousness,  except fivefold  consciousness)  (=  it  means  compatible  consciousness)  benefit  for  arising  of various mind-matter by means of efficiency of relations of various kinds accordingly. (the relation of compatibility etc., please see ***paṭṭhāna***.) 

**2.6.7 How the meaning can be understood?** 

There is a  reasonable question that  “how the  meaning, ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter is produced by consciousness, can be understood.” It is worth understanding through both ***Pāli Text*** (***sutta***) and credibility. 

In  the  ***Pāli  Text***  of  ***Dhammasangani  (Abhi-1-10)***,  it  is  preached  that “***cittanuparivattino***  ***dhammā***  =  mental  concomitants  are ***dhammas***  which  always  follows consciousness”. 

According to ways of preaching in this kind etc., the obvious occurrence of causal ***dhamma*** called consciousness of three kinds of mental aggregates, i.e., feeling-aggregate, perception- aggregate, formation-aggregate is accomplished well. 

Furthermore—in the aspect of credibility, in the world if a being’s mind is clear, that being’s corporeal ***dhammas*** also arise clearly. If a being’s mind is not clear, that being’s corporeal ***dhammas*** also arise unclearly. 

**PAGE-477** 

That  correlation  between  mind  and  corporeal  ***dhammas***  can  be  seen  directly. Guesswork-knowledge which can know the corporeality which is not worth knowing directly appears  through  CPM  (***cittajarūpa***)  which  is  worth  knowing  and  seeing  directly.  In  this world, therefore, this meaning, ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness can benefit for arising of ***paṭisandhi*** CPK (***kammajarūpa***) which is not worth seeing directly through CPM (***cittajarūpa***) which is worth seeing directly. 

***kammasamutṭhānassāpi hi tassa cittasamutṭhānasseva viññāņapaccayatā paṭṭhāne āgatā. (Abhi-A-2-164)*** 

