***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 351 - 400** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN ÑĀ*ŅAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE–351** 

Two kinds of significant fundamentals of rounds of rebirth, called ignorance-craving, are very important as the head among those cyclic ***dhamma*** of Dependent-Origination. When ***kamma**-*formations and actions *(**kamma**)* which are capable of cycling the ferris wheel of rounds of  rebirth, due to capability of covering of ignorance not to see the  reality, they performed  those  ***dhammas***  with  the  help  of  craving.  Therefore,  for  those  ignorance  and craving, the ignorance is the cause of craving of existence. It is because the fact that various existences, human being, heavenly being, *brahma* etc, which are concealed by ignorance and are full of faults, are strongly attached by craving.  Incapability to see up to the field of ultimate  realities  on  corporeal  aggregates,  mental  aggregates,  corporeal  and  mental aggregates and incapability to see general characters of those aggregates, viz., impermanence, suffering, non-self, change and alteration, is designated as the ignorance *(**avijjā**).* Due to capability of concealing of the ignorance not to see those faults of various existences, stupid worldly  persons  desire  strongly  on  those  various  existences.  Thus  the  ignorance  is  the primary cause of the craving of existence. In this way, it had been preached on the ignorance as beginning because it is very important ***dhamma*** as head among all cyclic ***dhammas**.* [The ignorance would not be the beginning of processes. In order to occur the ignorance, those causal ***dhammas*** called ***āsava** **dhammas*** (cankers) are also obviously present really.] (See ***Abhi-A-2-216-217;* Vs.2-156-157)** 

15. **The nature of the ignorance *(avijjā)*** 

***tattha  katamā  avijjā,  yam  aññānam  adassanam  anabhisamayo  ananubodho asambodho appativedo asańgāhaņā   (asańgāhanā)   apariyogāhaņā   (apariyogāhanā)   asamapekkhaņā   apaccavekkhaņā*** 

***apaccakkhakammam dummejjham bālyam asampajaññam moho pamoho sammoha avijjā avijjāgho avijjāyogo avijjānusayo avijjāpariyuṭṭhānam, avijjālańgī moho akusalamūlam. ayam vuccati avijjā. (Abhi.ll.150)*** 

1. ***aññāņa** \_\_\_* The knowledge *(**ñāņa**)* is the wisdom *(**paññā**)* which is capable of 

knowing differentiately. That wisdom called ***ñāņa*** is capable of making clarity of both the result of result, in other words, every result, right result, and the cause of the cause, in other words,  every  cause,  right  cause,  and  Four  Noble  Truths,  respectively.  However,  if  the ignorance *(**avijjā**)* occurs, it never allows to clarify on those right result, right cause and Four Noble Truths, differentiately. Thus this ignorance, due to occurrence of opposite of wisdom called ***ñāņa**,* is called ***aññāņa**.* 

2. ***adassana**  \_\_\_*  The  nature  of  capable  of  seeing  (=  ***dassana**)*  is  also  called  the 

wisdom *(**paññā**).* That  wisdom called ***dassana*** is also capable of seeing states of  affairs called ... 

**PAGE-352** 

1) ***atthattha**   =*  right resultant ***dhamma*** 
1) ***kāraņakāraņa***  =  right causal ***dhamma*** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

3) ***catusacca** **dhamma**  =*  Four Noble Truths. \_\_\_\_ 

However, if the ignorance occurs, it never allows to see those states of affairs. That 

ignorance, therefore, is called ***adassana**.* 

3. ***anabhisamaya**  \_\_\_*  The  nature  of  capable  of  knowing  penetratively  (= 

***abhisamaya**)* is also called the wisdom *(**paññā**).* That wisdom called ***abhisamaya*** is capable of knowing penetratively those states of affairs called ***atthattha, kāraņakāraņa, catusacca dhamma**.* However, if the ignorance occurs, it never allows to know penetratively on those states of affairs. That ignorance, therefore, is called ***anabhisamaya**.* 

4. __*ananubodha,*  5.  *a-sambodha,*  6.  *appaṭivedha*__  *\_\_\_*  The  nature  of  capable  of 

knowing properly (= ***anubodha**)* is also called the wisdom. The nature of capable of knowing really  (=  ***sambodha**)*  is  also  called  the  wisdom.  The  nature  of  capable  of  knowing penetratively  (=  ***pativedha**)*  is  also  called  the  wisdom.  That  wisdom  called  ***anubodha, sambodha, paṭivedha**,* is capable of knowing properly, really, penetratively on those states of affairs  called  ***atthattha,  kāraņakāraņa,  catusacca  dhamma**.*  However,  if  the  ignorance occurs, it never allows to know properly, really, penetratively on those states of affairs. That ignorance, therefore, is called ***ananubodha, asambodha, appaṭivedha**.* 

7. ***asangdhana** -* The nature of capable of accepting (= ***sańgāhanā**)* is also called the 

wisdom. That wisdom called ***sańgāhanā*** is capable of accepting, rubbing, keeping, getting on those states of affairs called ***atthattha, kāraņakāraņa, catusacca dhamma**.* However, if the ignorance occurs, it never allows to accept, rub, keep, get on those states of affairs. That ignorance, therefore, is called ***asańgāhanā**.* 

8. ***apariyogāhanā**  \_\_\_\_*  The  nature  of  capable  of  accepting  in  all  directions  (= 

***pariyogāhanā**)* is also the wisdom. That wisdom called ***pariyogāhanā*** is capable of accepting orderly  and  getting  on  those  states  of  affairs  called  ***atthattha,  kāraņakāraņa,  catusacca dhamma**.* However if the ignorance occurs, it never allow to accept orderly and get those states of affairs. The ignorance, therefore, is called ***a-pariyogāhanā**.* 

9. ***asamapekkhand**  \_\_\_*  The  nature  of  capable  of  observing  harmoniously  (= 

***samapekkhaņā**)* is also called the wisdom. That wisdom called ***samapekkhaņā*** is capable of observing harmoniously on those states of affairs called ***atthaltha**, **kāraņakāraņa**, **catusacca dhamma**.* However, if the ignorance occurs, it never allows to observe harmoniously on those states of affairs. That ignorance therefore is called ***a-samapekkhaņā**.*** 

**PAGE-353** 

10. ***a-paccavekkhaņā\_\_\_\_*** The nature of capable of reviewing *(= **paccavekkhaņā**)* is 

also called the wisdom. That wisdom called ***paccavekkhaņā*** is capable of reviewing on those states  of  affairs  called  ***atlhattha,  kāraņakāraņa,  catusacca  dhamma**.*  However,  if  the ignorance  occurs,  it  never  allows  reviewing  on  those  states  of  affairs.  That  ignorance, therefore, is called ***a-paccavekkhaņā**.* 

11. ***apaccakkhakamma\_\_\_\_***  There  is  no  function  which  is  perceived  by  that 

ignorance.  The  ignorance,  itself  functions  the  work  without  reasoning.  That  ignorance, therefore, is called ***apaccakkhakamma**.* 

12. ***dummejjha\_\_\_\_***  Due  to  occurrence  of  the  cause  of  absence  of  wisdom,  that 
PAGE3

ignorance is called ***dummejjha**.* 

13. ***bālya** -* Due to occurrence of the cause of stupid person, it is called ***bālya**.* 
13. ***a-sampajaññā\_\_\_\_***  The  nature  of  capable  of  comprehending  thoroughly  (= 

***sampajañña**)*  is  also  called  the  wisdom.  That  wisdom  called  ***sampajañña***  is  capable  of comprehending thoroughly on right result, right cause, Four Noble Truths called ***atthattha**, **kāraņakāraņa**,  **catusacca  dhamma**.*  However,  if  the  ignorance  occurs,  it  never  allows comprehending differentiately on those states of affairs. That ignorance, therefore, is called ***a-sampajañña**.* 

15. ***moha,* 16. *pamoha,* 17. *sammoha \_\_\_\_*** By means of delusion, that ignorance is 

called  ***moha**.*  By  means  of  strong  delusion,  it  is  called  ***pamoha***  while  by  means  of circumstantial delusion, it is called ***sammoha**.* 

18. ***avijjā \_\_\_ vindatīti vijjā** =* Due to capable of attaining wholesome deeds which 

are deserving to attain but not unwholesome deeds which are not deserving to attain, the knowledge *(**ñāņa**)* is called ***vijjā**.* In turn, ***na** + **vijjā** = **avijjā** =* the opposite of ***vijjā**, **moha*** (= delusion) is called ***avijjā**.* 

Due to presence of the meaning that it does not deserve to fulfil, all unwholesome deeds, bodily misconducts etc, are called ***avindiya**.* Due to occurrence of capable of attaining unwholesome deeds which are undeserving to attain, the nature of delusion *(**moha**)* is called the ignorance. In turn, wholesome deeds, bodily right conducts, etc, are called ***vindiya*** due to occurrence  of  deserving  to  attain.  Due  to  occurrence  of  incapable  of  attaining  those wholesome deeds, bodily right conduct etc, the nature of delusion is called the ignorance *(**avijjā**).* 

That delusion *(**moha**)* is capable of making not to know both the meaning of set of ***khandhās**;*  the  meaning  of  bases  *(**āyatana**),*  eye-clear-sensitivity  etc,  that  is  capable  of occurring depending ***dhamma**,* seeing-consciousness etc; the meaning of elements *(**dhātu**)* that is avoiding from being, living self *(**atta jīva**);* the meaning of truths *(**sacca**)* that is the occurrence of right; the meaning of controlling faculties *(**indare**),* that is the occurrence of chief. That delusion, therefore, is called the ignorance. 

**PAGE-354** 

Due to capability of making not to know 16 kinds of meanings of truth which are interpreted by four ways for each noble truth, ***dukkha** **sacca*** etc, that delusion, therefore, is called the ignorance. 

According to the words \_\_\_ ***dīgho bālāna samsāro**,* the rounds of rebirth *(**samsāra**)* is infinite long for stupid persons with strong ignorance. Due to capable of going to all kinds of conceptions,  all  kinds  of  the  next  existences,  all  kinds  of  existences,  all  kinds  of consciousness of process of NONE *(**viññāņaṭṭhiti**),* all kinds of realms of beings for beings in endless rounds of rebirth in that way, the delusion *(**moha**)* is called the ignorance *(**avijjā**).* 

Due  to  capable  of  occurring  in  concepts  *(**paññatti**),*  man,  woman  etc,  which  are obviously  absent  in  the  aspect  of  ultimate  reality  but  incapable  of  occurring  in  those ***dhammas**, **khandhas*** etc, which are obviously present in the aspect of ultimate reality, the delusion is called the ignorance. 

Due to occurrence of ability to conceal not to know those ultimate ***dhammas*** called physical  bases  and  objects,  seeing-consciousness  etc;  the  causal  ***dhamma***  called ***paṭiccasamuppāda**,* the ignorance etc; and the resultant ***dhamma*** called ***paṭiccasamuppanna**, **kamma**-*formation etc, it is called the ignorance *(**avijjā**).* 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE66

19. ***avijjogha**\_\_\_\_* It is capable of satisfying and sinking in the suffering of rounds of 

rebirth. It, therefore, is called ***avijjogha**.* 

20. ***avijjāyoga\_\_\_\_*** Due to capable of yoking with suffering of rounds of rebirth, it is 

called ***avijjāyoga**.* 

21. ***avijjānusaya**\_\_\_\_*  Due  to  occurrence  of  non-eradication  by  the  Noble  Path-

Knowledge and due to capable of occurring repeatedly, it is called ***avijjānusaya**.* 

22. ***avijjāpariyuṭṭhāna**  \_\_\_\_\_*  As  road-robbers  rob  travellers,  due  to  capable  of 

robbing wholesome consciousness, it is called ***avijjāpariyuṭṭhāna**.* 

23. ***avijjālańgī\_\_\_\_\_*** As if the city-door had been bolted with very strong wooden bar, 

both inward and outward movements of the peoples staying inside or outside the city are ceased, similarly\_\_\_\_ in the city of personality of such person, called set of five aggregates *(**khandha**)* which are obviously present in the aspect of ultimate reality, it had been bolted with very strong wooden bar of ignorance. The proceeding of that person's knowledge which is capable of reaching to ***nibbāna*** had been ceased. Therefore, the ignorance is called ***lańgī** (**=*** bolt). 

24. ***moha\_\_\_\_***  The  nature  of  delusion  on  the  ultimate  ***dhamma***  is  called  the 

ignorance. 

25. ***akusalamūla**\_\_\_\_* That delusion is not only unwholesome deeds but also the root 

of unwholesome ***dhammas**.* That delusion, therefore, is called ***a-kusalamūla**.* In other words - due to occurrence of root of unwholesome mind and mental concomitants, it is called ***a- kusalamūla**.* 

**PAGE-355** 

That ***a-kusalamūla***  is  none  of  other ***dhammas*** except  delusion.  In  this  section  of detailed account of this ignorance, desired ***dhamma*** called ignorance is delusion. Therefore delusion *(**moha**)* is ***a-kusalamūla** **dhamma**,* the root of unwholesome deeds. 

It can be said that this nature with these characters can be designated as the ignorance. Thus it should be recognized on the nature of ignorance which deserves to memorize by means of 25 kinds of terms. ***(Abhi.A.II.132,* 133)** 

16. **Efficiency of the ignorance** 

Then this ignorance with these characters is the delusion *(**moha**)* which is the opposite of the knowledge that is capable of knowing Four Noble Truths, ***dukkha** **sacca*** etc. Due to occurrence of delusion belonging to the ***dukkha** **sacca**,* in the aspect of ultimate reality, this ignorance is a part of ***dukkha** **sacca**.* It occurs associating with ***dukkha** **sacca**.* It is able not only to take the object *of **dukkha** **sacca*** but also to conceal not to know ***dukkha sacca***.*** 

It  is  not  a  part  of  ***samudaya**  **sacca**.*  (It  is  because  only  the  craving  is  meant  as ***samudaya** **sacca**.)* During the consciousness rooted in greed occurs, due to ability to occur within the same mind moment simultaneously, that ignorance which is known as ***dukkha** **sacca**,* occurs associated with the craving which is known as ***samudaya** **sacca**.* It is able not only to take the object of ***samudaya** **sacca*** but also to conceal not to know that ***samudaya** **sacca**.* 

That ignorance is not a part of ***nirodha** **sacca**,* and further more it is unable to occur associating with ***nirodha** **sacca**.* It is unable to take the object of that ***nirodha** **sacca*** but it is able to conceal not to __know that *nirodha*__ *__sacca__.* 
PAGE5

It is not a part of ***magga** **sacca**,* and furthermore it is unable to occur associating with ***magga** **sacca**.* It is unable to take the object of that ***magga** **sacca*** but it is able to conceal not to know that ***magga** **sacca**.* 

By means of taking the object of ***dukkha** **sacca**,* the ignorance occurs resulting in ability to conceal not to know that ***dukkha** **sacca**.* By means of taking the object of ***samudaya** **sacca**,* the ignorance occurs resulting in ability to conceal not to know that ***samudaya** **sacca**.* By means of taking the object of ***nirodha** **sacca**,* the ignorance never occur but it is able to conceal not to know that ***nirodha** **sacca**.* By means of taking the object of ***magga** **sacca**,* the ignorance never occur but it is able to conceal not to know that ***magga** **sacca**. **(Abhi-A-2-133)*** 

Both two ***dhammas**, **dukkha** **sacca*** and ***samudaya** **sacca**,* are very profound due to occurrence of difficulties to see them. Both two ***dhammas**, **nirodha** **sacca*** and ***magga** **sacca*** are very difficult to see due to occurrence of profound nature. Furthermore, ***dukkha** **nirodha** **ariya** **sacca*** (= noble truth of cessation of suffering) is not only very profound but also very difficult to see. Among those noble truths, the suffering *(**dukkha**)* is obvious. Although it is obvious,  it  is  designated  as  very  profound  one  because  the  specific  character  *(**sabhāva lakkhaņā**)* and the general character *(**sāmañña lakkhaņā**)* of each ultimate element called ***dukkha** **sacca*** are very difficult to see. It is also the same as ***samudaya** **sacca*** in this way. 

**PAGE-356** 

As it is very burdensome to extract either the flocculated mass from curd by churning or the essence of nourishment from the ocean water by stirring, as it is very burdensome to bring the sands from base of mount *Meru* or to extract the essence juice from mount *Meru* by squeezing \_\_\_ similarly\_\_\_\_ 

those two ***dhammas**, **nirodha** **sacca*** and ***magga** **sacca**,* are very difficult to see due to occurrence of profound situation. Actually, ***nirodha** **sacca*** is more profound situation and difficult to see ***magga** **sacca**.* 

In this way, this nature which is very profound situation due to presence of difficulties to see; which is very difficult to see due to occurrence of profound situation; which is capable of concealing Four Noble Truths; 

which  is  cloud  of  darkness  called  delusion  *(**moha**),*  can  be  designated  as  the  ignorance *(**avijjā**). **(Abhi-A-2-134)*** 

**Notice:** \_\_\_ The ***meditator*** who wants to study the doctrine of Dependent-Origination *(**paṭiccasamuppāda**)* should take the object of ***Pāli*** text ***Paṭiccasamuppāda** **Vibhahga*** and translations  which  are  presented  in  the  beginning  of  this  book.  If  it  is  so  the  following explanation can be understood and can discern each way of practice. 

**2.2** 

1. ***avijjā paccayā sańkhārā*** 

**(The ignorance causes *kamma*-**formation**)** 

***sańkhāra**  \_\_\_\_*  according  to  explanation,  ***sańkhatamabhisańkharontītl  sańkhārā,*** 

*(**Abhi-A-1-127**)* due to capability to perform the occurrence of five aggregates and resultant corporeal  and  mental  ***dhamma**,*  which  are  called  ***sańkhata**,*  those  ***dhammas**,*  mundane 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE88

wholesome volition and unwholesome volition are called ***sańkhāra**.* 

1. These 13 kinds of wholesome volition, 

8 kinds of great wholesome volition of sensuous sphere *(**kāmāvacara mahākusala*** 

***cetanā**)* which are caused by means of charity, virtue, meditation practice; 

4 kinds of wholesome volition of fine-material sphere *(**rūpāvacara kusala cetanā**)* which  are  associating  with  four  absorptions  of  fine  material  sphere  according  to  tetrad method *(**catukka nayd**);* 

5 kinds of wholesome volition of fine material sphere which are associating with five absorptions of fine material sphere according to pentad method *(**pañcaka  naya**);* are called ***puññābhi sańkhāra.*** Because great wholesome volition of sensuous sphere can cause five aggregates, resultant corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** in 7 happy realms while those of fine material sphere can cause five aggregates, resultant corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** in 16 realms of fine material sphere, those wholesome volition are called ***puññābhi** **sańkhāra**.* 

These 13 kinds of wholesome volition are called meritorious deed *(**puñña**),* due to occurrence of capability to purify and eradicate those sufferings, viz., bad resultant suffering, mentally suffering and impurity of defilements *(**samkilesā**)* for the person who cultivates these volition. By means of inner desire for its own sake wholesome deeds were cultivated. Because it is capable fulfilling inner desire of the person who performs wholesome deeds, that wholesome volition is called meritorious deed *(**puñña**).* Because of capability to occur happy existence which is deserving to worship, that wholesome volition is called meritorious deed (***puñña**).* Because it is capable of performing to occur resultant mentality and resultant corporeality  called*,*  that  wholesome  volition  is  called  ***abhisańkhāra**.*  Those  wholesome volition of sensuous sphere and fine material sphere which are called not only ***puñña*** but also ***abhisańkhāra**,* are designated _**apuññābhisańkhāra**. (**Abhi-A-2-**_**134; _Mūlaṭī-2-93_**_)_ 

**PAGE-357** 

2. These 12 kinds of unwholesome volition which are caused by means of killing 

being etc, due to occurrence of opposite ***a-puñña**,* are called unwholesome deeds *(**a-puñña**).* Because it is capable of performing to occur woeful existences, that unwholesome volition called  ***a-puñña***  is  also  called  ***abhisańkhāra**.*  Those  12  unwholesome  volition  which  are called not only ***a-puñña*** but also ***abhisańkhāra**,* are designated as ***a-puññābhisańkhāra**.* 

3. Because of occurrence of very distance from hindrances *(**nīvaraņa**),* strong 

desire to sensual object *(**kāmacchanda**)* etc, which are opposite of concentration *(**smādhi**),* unshakable  absorptions  of  immaterial  sphere  *(**arūpajhāna**)*  are  called  *"**āneñja**".*  Those absorptions  of  immaterial  sphere  are  also  called  ***abhisańkhāra***  because  it  is  capable  of performing  to  occur  resultant  ***dhamma**.*  Those  four  kinds  of  wholesome  volition  of immaterial sphere which are called not only ***āneñja*** but also ***abhisańkhāra**,* are designated as ***āneñja** **abhisańkhāra**.* In other words - due to capability to perform occurrence of unshakable existence **of** immaterial sphere, that wholesome volition of immaterial sphere are designated 

as ***āneñjābhisańkhāra**. (**Abhi-A-2-134***) 

***magga  cetanā*  (volition  associated  with  Path-Knowledge)**  \_\_\_\_  Although  the volition  associated  with  Path-Knowledge  is  able  to  perform  directly  the  occurrence  of resultant  ***sańkhata***  called  Noble  Fruit  Knowledge  *(**ariya  phala  ñāņa**),*  it  should  be recognized the fact that that volition must not accounted in the meaning of ***sańkhāra*** owing 
PAGE7

to it does not concerned in this ***vaṭṭakathā*** (= the preaching that shows way of cycling of ***vaṭṭa**).* 

In order to show the way of process by means of doors *(**dvāra**)* that those ***sańkhāra*** are performed by means of body-door *(**kāya**. **dvāra**),* verbal-door *(**vacī** **dvāra**),* mind-door *(**mano** **dvāra**),* the Buddha further preached on three kinds of ***sańkhāra**,* viz., ***kāya sańkhāra (=*** bodily ***kamma-***formation***), vacī sańkhāra* (=** verbally ***kamma-***formation***), citta sańkhāra (=*** mentally ***kamma-***formation***),*** accordingly. 

2. ***Parivīmamsana sutta*** 

***puññañce  sańkhāram  abhisańkhāroti,  puññūpagam  hoti  viññāņam.  apuññañce sańkhāram  abhisańkhāroti,  apuññūpagam  hoti  viññāņam.  āneñjañce  sańkhāram abhisańkhāroti, āneñjūpagam hoti viññāņam. (Sam-1-310)*** 

If  ***kamma***  which  is  capable  of  performing  wholesome  resultant  ***dhamma***  will  be cultivated, the resultant consciousness of process of NONE which is capable of reaching the existence  of  well-being  *(**bhava  sampatti**)*  will  be  occurred.  If  unwholesome  ***kamma**-* formation  will  be  cultivated,  the  resultant  consciousness  of  process  of  NONE  which  is capable of  reaching the existence with failures *(**bhava vipatti**);* which is the result *of a- **puñña**,* will be occurred. If ***kamma**-*formation of immaterial sphere, which is called ***āneñja**,* the resultant consciousness of process of NONE, which is capable of reaching the existence of immaterial sphere; which is the result of unshakable ***kamma**,* will be occurred. ***(Sam-l- 310)*** 

**PAGE-358** 

3. ***Vibhańga sutta*** 

***tayome  bhikkhave sańkhārā.  katame  tayo?  kāyasańkhāro  vacīsańkhāro  cittasańkhāro. (Sam-1-245)*** 

- ***Bhikkhus** ...* there are three kinds of ***kamma**-*formation *(**sańkhāra**).* Which are these 

three?  These  are bodily ***kamma**-*formation*,*  verbally ***kamma**-*formation*,*  mentally ***kamma**-* formation indeed. ***(Sam-*1-245)** 

4. **What this *abhidhamma* means** 

***ayam  abhidhammo  nāma  na  adhunākato,  nāpi  bāhirakaisīhi  vā  sāvakehi  vā devatāhi vā bhāsito. sabbaññujinabhāsito pana ayam. abhidhammepihi suttepi ekasadisāva tanti niddiṭṭhāti imassatthassa dīpanattham. (Abhi-A-2-134-*135)** 

There is a reasonable question that why it is extracted in this case that those ***kamma**-* formations*, **puññābhisańkhāra*** etc, which are preached in this _**Abhidhamma** **Vibhanga Pāli**_** Text, are the same as those _**kamma**-_ formations, **_puññābhisańkhāra_** etc, which are preached in discourses of **_suttanta_** with referring to these _**Parivīmamsana sutta, Vibhanga sutta**._ 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE10

Those persons with paradoxes *(**vitanda vādī**)* have no desire to accept ***Abhidhamma*** as the Buddha's preaching *(**jinabhāsita**).* In order to reject that ideology it has been extracted on ***puññābhisańkhāra*** etc which are preached in ***Parivīmamsana sutta, Vibhanga sutta**,* in this case. 

This noble preaching called ***Abhidhamma**,* indeed, is neither created for just now nor preached by any kind of persons, hermits existing out of ***sāsanā*** or disciples of the Buddha or heavenly beings but it is preached by the Buddha himself. It is right. - It has been shown the consistencies of ***Pāli*** Text which are identical among both ***Abhidhamma*** and ***Suttanta Pāli*** Texts. Because of this reason that this meaning is intended to clarify, it has been explained by extracting these ***suttanta*** in which ***puññābhisańkhāra**,* etc, are preached by the Buddha. 

**Those** ***suttanta*** are not rejected as paradoxes but accepted as orthodoxies preached by the Buddha himself. Because those ***suttanta*** and this preaching of ***Abhidhamma** **Vibhanga*** are identical to each other, it is obvious the fact that this ***Abhidhamma** **Pāli*** Text is the preaching of the Buddha *(**jinabhāsita**)* really. ***(Abhi**-**A-2-134,135)*** 

Any ***meditator*** who has strong desire to attain ***nibbāna*** must follow respectfully this point of view that those instructions found in ***suttanta*** and ***Abhidhamma*** are identical. (Take the object of ***Pāli*** Text, ***Paṭiccasamuppāda Vibhanga*** and translations, which are presented in the beginning of this book.) 

**PAGE-359** 

5. ***Dānamaya cetanā (puññabhisańkhāra)*** 

In the continuum of any kind of persons, in accordance with the preaching of the monastic code ***(vi naya)**,* the person who offers any kind of four requisites, viz., food, robes, monastery and medicine, or in accordance with the preaching of ***Abhidhamma**,* the person who offers any kind of six objects, colour-object etc, or in accordance with the preaching of ***suttanta**,* the person who offers any kind of 10 donated commodities, any kind of volition *(**cetanā**)* which occur in three periods, viz., 

1) previous period before offers 
1) present period during offering 
1) later period after offered 

**is** designated as ***dānamaya** **cetanā** (=* volition through charity). It is great wholesome volition 

of sensuous sphere *(**kāmāvacara mahākusala** **cetanā**),* indeed. *(**Abhi-A-2-135**)* [It can be recollected  by  the  consciousness  associating  with  ***upekkhā**  **vedanā***  (indifferent  feeling) indeed. *(**Mūlaṭī-2-94**)]* 

6. ***STiamaya cetanā (puññabhlsańkhāra)*** 

The great wholesome volition of sensuous sphere which occurs in the continuum of any  kind  of  persons,  the  person  who  is  going  to  monastery  after  the  right  decision  that ordination will be carried out in order to fulfil virtue completely; or the person who had 
PAGE9

finished to ordain as ***bhikkhu**;* or the person who reflects that "I have finished to ordain systematically, it is well done, well done" etc, after his desire had been reached up to the climax of ordination ceremony; or the person who restraints with regarding to monastic codes called ***pāṭimokkhasamvara sīla**;* or the person who reflects with knowledge whenever he uses four requisites, viz., robes, food, monastery, medicine; the person who restraint with doors, eye-door *(**cakkhu** **dvāra**)* etc, when those objects, such as colour-object etc, strike on respective  clear-sensitivity,  such  as  eye-clear-sensitivity  etc;  or  the  person  who  always purifies livelihood; is designated as ***sīlamaya** **cetanā** (=* volition through virtue). _(**Abhi-A-2-**_ **135**)  

7. ***Bhāvanāmaya cetanā (puññabhlsańkhāra)*** 

The wholesome volition, which is occurring in the continuum of ***meditator*** who is 

developing  ***vipassanā***  practice  by  means  of  three  general  characters,  viz.  ***anicca*** (impermanence), ***dukkha*** (suffering), ***anatta*** (non-self), which are discerning knowledge on five  aggregates  *(**khandha**),*  twelve  bases  *(**āyatana**),*  18  elements  *(**dhātu**),*  factors  of Dependent-Origination  *(**paṭiccasamuppāda**),*  in  accordance  with  the  preaching  of ***Paṭisambhidā**d  **Magga**  **Pāli***  Text  *(**Khu-9-97**),*  is  designated  as  ***bhāvanāmaya**  **cetanā**  (=* volition  through  ***vipassanā***  practice).  In  other  words  -  the  wholesome  volition,  which  is occurring in the continuum of ***meditator*** who is developing ***vipassanā*** practice by discerning as ***anicca**, **dukkha**, **anatta*** on six doors *(**dvāra**),* six objects *(**ārammaņa**),* six consciousness *(**viññāņa**),* six contacts *(**phassa**),* six feelings *(**vedanā**),* six perceptions *(**saññā**),* 12 factors of Dependent-Origination, is designated as ***bhāvanāmaya** **cetanā*** (= volition through ***vipassanā*** practice). *(**Abhi**-**A-2-135-136***) [These are eight kinds of great wholesome volition, indeed.] 

**PAGE-360** 

Those  volition  through  ***samatha***  and  ***vipassanā***  practices  are  (8)  kinds  of  great wholesome volition and (5) kinds of wholesome volition of fine-material sphere, totally, 13 kinds,  indeed.  In  this  case,  those  great  wholesome  volition  without  knowledge  *(**ñāņa** **vipayutta**)* are also belonging to ***bhāvanāmaya** **cetanā**.* 

The  person  who  is  reciting  some  ***Pāli***  Text,  ***Dhammacakkapavaṭṭana**  **sutta**, **Anattalakkhaņa** **sutta***  etc,  which  have been proficiently  learned,  usually  did  not  get  the massage although connections 1, 2, etc, had been beyond sometime. As he understands when those are reflected again, similarly - in the continuum of any kind of persons, the person who makes  preliminary  object  of  ***kasiņa**  (**kasiņa**  **parikamma**),*  or  the  person  who  reflects  on proficiently  learned  absorption  *(**jhāna**),*  or  the  person  who  takes  into  heart  proficiently learned meditation practice *(**kammaṭṭhāna**),* not only great wholesome deeds with knowledge *(**ñāņasampayulla  mahākusala**)*  but  also  great  wholesome  deeds  without  knowledge *(**ñāņavipayutta mahākusala**)* can be occurred. In the stage of ***vipassanā**,* it is also similar way. Therefore, it is explained on (13) kinds of wholesome volition through ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practices. *(**Abhi**-**A-2-135**)* 

All  kinds  of  wholesome  deeds  of  meditation  practices  before  the  full  absorption *(**jhāna**)* and the Path-Knowledge will be reached, are designated as great wholesome deeds 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE13

*(**mahākusala**).*  Those  great  wholesome  volition are  wholesome  deeds  through  meditation practice,  indeed.  Those  great  wholesome  volition,  which  are  occurring  through  charity, virtue,  meditation  practice  are  designated  as  ***puññābhisańkhāra**.*  Wholesome  volition  of absorptions of fine material sphere are also designated as ***puññābhisańkhāra**.* 

***a-puññabhisańkhāra** -* Those unwholesome volition which are associating with (12) kinds of unwholesome  consciousness are called ***a**-**puññabhisańkhāra**.* Among those (12) kinds on unwholesome volition, excluding (2) kinds of volition which are associating with mentally disagreeable feelings and are rooted in hate, remaining (10) kinds of unwholesome volition can be occurred in existences of fine material and immaterial sphere. However it can not give rise to born in those existences of fine material and immaterial sphere really. It can give  rise  to  occur  resultant  ***dhamma***  as  the  consciousness  of  process  of  NONE,  in  the existences  of  sensuous  sphere.  The  Buddha,  therefore,  preached  on  those  unwholesome 

volition as ***kāmavacara** **dhamma** (= **dhammas*** occurring in sensuous sphere). *(**Abhi-2-136**)* ***āneñjābhisańkhāra**  -*  Four  kinds  of  wholesome  volition  of  immaterial  sphere  are  called ***āneñjābhisańkhāra**.* It is right. These four kinds of wholesome volition of immaterial sphere can be designated as ***āneñjābhisańkhāra*** due to occurrence of not only unshakable but also capable of performing unshaken resultant ***dhamma**.* 

It will be elaborated. - These (15) kinds of ***dhammas**,* viz., three kinds of volition of the  four  absorption  of  fine  material  sphere,  wholesome  *(**kusala**),*  resultant  *(**vipāka**)*  and independent *(**kiriya**)* volition; (12) kinds of volition of immaterial sphere, i.e., four each of wholesome,  resultant  and  independent  volition,  respectively,  are  called  ***āneñja***  due  to occurrence of unshakable and unmovable ones. Among those volition, although wholesome volition  of  fine  material  sphere  is  unshakable  one,  it  is  capable  of  occurring  resultant corporeal and resultant mental ***dhammas**,* which are either similar to itself or dissimilar to itself; which are either shakable ones or unshakable ones. Therefore it can not be occurred as ***āneñjābhisańkhāra**.*  [It  means  that  resultant  corporeality  produced  by  ***kamma** (**kamma**ja**rūpa**)* is different from the wholesome volition itself *(**asarikkhaka**)* and the former 

is shakable result *(**saiñjana**).*] **PAGE-361** 

Then resultant volition and independent volition of fine material sphere are unable to perform the occurrence of resultant ***dhamma*** because these are incapable ones. Similarly four kinds of resultant volition and four kinds of independent volition of immaterial sphere are also unable to perform the occurrence of resultant ***dhammas*** because these are incapable ones. Thus these (11) kinds of volition can be designated as ***āneñja*** but not ***abhisańkhāra**.* 

Then,  as  the  shadows  of  animals,  such  as  elephant,  horse  etc,  are  similar  to themselves,  similarly  -  the  wholesome  volition  of  immaterial  sphere  are  able  to  occur resultant mental ***dhammas*** of immaterial sphere which are the same and unshakable ones as themselves. "Therefore, only four kinds of wholesome volition of immaterial sphere can be designated as ***āneñjābhisańkhāra**",* it should be recognized in this way. _(**Abhi-A-2-**_**136**) 

8. ***Dānamaya cetanā* (volition through charity)** 

***dāna  vasena  pavattā  cittacetasikādhammā  dānam.  tattha  byāpārabhūtā āyūhanacetanā dānam ārabbha dānam adhikicca uppajatīti vuccati. evam itaresu. (Mūlaṭī-***
PAGE12

***2-94)*** 

Those ***dhammas*** called mind and mental concomitants which occurred by means of charity are called ***dāna**.* Among those mind and mental concomitants, it can be said that the volition *(**cetanā**),* which is the cause of endeavour, occurs by taking and depending upon the object of charity. ***(Mūlaṭī-2-94)*** 

It  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  it  has  explained  on  ***dānamaya**  **cetanā***  by significant method *(**padhāna**  **naya**)* with regarding to this explanation ***Mūlaṭīkā**.* It should, however,  be  recognized  that  all  kinds  of  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants,  which occurred by means of charity, are wholesome ***kamma**-*formation* through charity *(**dānamaya** **kusala** **sańkhāra**).* For those wholesome ***kamma**-*formations through virtue and meditation practices, it is similar way, indeed. 

Therefore, it should be recognized the fact that with regarding to the term ***sańkhāra**,* it must not discern on volition *(**cetanā**)* only but on all kinds of ***sańkhāra**,* wholesome ***kamma**-* formations  and  unwholesome  ***kamma**-*formations  which  are  led  by  the  volition  *(**cetanā**)* during keeping in mind causes and results and during performing on ***vipassanā*** practice. 

Thus these kinds of volition: 

1) 13 kinds of wholesome volition by means of wholesome ***kamma***-formation 
1) 12 kinds of unwholesome volition by means of unwholesome ***kamma**-*formation 
1) 4  kinds  of  wholesome  volition  by  means  of  ***āneñjābhisańkhāra**,* 

totally 29 kinds are varieties of volition. 

In this way, the Buddha designated as ***kamma**-*formation *(**sańkhāra**)* on 29 kinds of volition  only  among  those  wholesome  volition  and  unwholesome  volition  which  are occurring  in  the  continuum  of  infinite  beings  existing  in  infinite  universes  by  means  of knowledge of omniscience *(**sabbaññuta ñāņa**)* as weighing with large pair of scales or as measuring with betel box. *(**Abhi-A-2-136**)* 

**PAGE-362** 

After  wholesome  ***kamma**-*formation  etc  had  been  shown,  when  infinite  beings existing  in  infinite  universes  endeavour  wholesome  and  unwholesome  actions,  they endeavour through such doors *(**dvāra**),* now in order to show three kinds of doors which are causes of endeavouring of those actions *(**kamma**),* the Buddha continued to preach bodily ***kamma**-*formation etc. 

9. ***kāyasańkhāra = kāyasancetanā*** 

***Kāyasañcetanā*** are these 20 kinds of volition, viz., (8) kinds of great wholesome volition and (12) kinds of unwholesome volition, which are capable of making the occurrence of bodily expression corporeality *(**kāya** **viññatti** **rūpa**)* and which are caused by body door *(**kāya** **dvāra**).* It is also acceptable to say that 20 kinds of wholesome and unwholesome volition which occurred by consistent pulling, by ready tugging, by reaching to moving, are designated as ***kāya** **sańkhāra*** (bodily ***kamma**-*formation*). (**Abhi-A-2-137**)* 

10. **(A) *vacīsańkhāra = vacī sañcetanā*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE15

***Vacī sañcetanā*** are those 20 kinds of volition, which are capable of making the occurrence of verbal expression corporeality *(**vacī** **viññatti** **rūpa**)* and which are caused by verbal door *(**vacī** **dvāra**).* It is also acceptable to say those 20 kinds of volition which occurred by reaching to the moving of chin, by reaching to distant voice of words, are designated as ***vacī** **sańkhāra*** (verbally ***kamma**-*formation*).* 

10. **(B) *abhiññāņacetanā* and *uddhaccacetanā*** 

These bodily and verbally ***kamma**-*formation *(= **kāyasañcetanā**, **vacīsañcetanā**)* do not  concern  ***abhiññāņacetanā***  (volition  associated  with  super-psychic  knowledge).  That ***abhiññāņacetanā*** is not a kind of volition which is capable of benefiting for arising resultant consciousness of process of NONE in accordance with ***sańkhāra** **paccaya** **viññāņam**,* which will be presented in later. Therefore, ***abhiññāņacetanā*** should not be inferred in order to interpret the word ***sańkhāra**. (**Abhi-A-2-137***) 

Why  can  not  that  ***abhiññāņacetanā***  benefit  the  resultant  consciousness (consciousness of process of NONE etc) to be occurred? It is a reasonable question that "isn't that ***abhiññāņa** **cetanā*** also both wholesome volition with faultless and beneficial nature and resultant ***dhamma*** with the nature of cause to occur benefit? 

That ***abhiññāņacetanā*** is not only wholesome ***dhamma*** but also resultant ***dhamma*** with the nature of cause to occur benefit. Although it is true in that way, it had been preached on  that  ***abhiññāņacetanā***  as  both  wholesome  volition  and  resultant  ***dhamma***  due  to occurrence of that ***abhiññāņacetanā*** with endeavour in the continuum of worldly person, upstream  enterer  *(**sotāpanna**),*  once  returner  *(**sakadāgāmī**)*  and  non-returner  *(**anādgāmī**),* who  are  present  with  ceaseless  craving,  ignorance,  conceit.  It  did  not  preached  on  that volition  as  the  occurrence  of  both  wholesome  volition  and  resultant  ***dhamma***  due  to capability to occur resultant ***dhamma*** called consciousness of process of NONE etc, really. 

**PAGE-363** 

If that ***abhiññāņacetanā*** can give rise to occur resultant ***dhamma**,* consciousness of process of NONE etc, only resultant ***dhamma*** of fine material sphere would be resulted. Why is it? - It is because the action (***kamma**)* which occurs in different sphere can not give rise to occur resultant ***dhamma*** which occurs in different sphere. (The action of sensuous sphere can not give rise to occur resultant ***dhamma*** in the fine material sphere and vice versa.) 

Furthermore - if that ***abhiññāņacetanā*** can give rise to occur resultant consciousness of process of NONE, the latter with the same objects by three situations, viz., consciousness of process of NONE, life-continuum *(**bhavańga**),* death consciousness, would be resulted. Why is it? - It can be known that the Buddha preached on resultant ***dhamma*** with the same object  of  the  action  for  fine  material  sphere  in  ***Pāli***  Text  of  ***cittuppādakanda**, **Dhammasańganī**.* 

Furthermore - there is no resultant ***dhamma*** of fine material sphere, which has the object of corporeality and mentality of sensuous sphere called ***paritta**. **Abhiññāņa** **cetanā**,* however, has the object of ***paritta**,* corporeality and mentality of sensuous sphere etc. (= It can take the object of ***paritta**,* corporeality and mentality of sensuous sphere etc.) Therefore it can be known the fact that resultant consciousness of process of NONE can not be occurred by that volition. 

Again  -  ***abhiññāņa***  is  the  result  of  concentration  of  fourth  absorption  taking  the ***kasiņa*** objects. The Buddha preached that *"**so evam samāhite citte**".* (***Dī-76-77; M-1-314-***
PAGE14

***315***) etc. Therefore that ***abhiññāņa** **cetanā*** which is similar to the result of concentration of fourth absorption, can not give rise to occur resultant ***dhamma*** really. As attaining wealth in that life is the result of charity and virtue, similarly, that ***abhiññāņa** **cetanā*** cannot give rise to resultant consciousness of process of NONE indeed. *(**Mūlaṭī-2-95**)* 

As  ***abhiññāņa**  **cetanā***  can  not  benefit  the  occurrence  of  resultant  consciousness, consciousness of process of NONE etc, similarly, ***uddhacca** **cetanā** (=* the volition of unrest) can not benefit the occurrence of resultant consciousness, consciousness of process of NONE etc.  Therefore  that  ***uddhacca**  **cetanā***  also  deserves  to  reject  as  the  cause  of  resultant consciousness, consciousness of process of NONE etc. However in the preaching, due to the ignorance, ***kamma**-*formations occur, those ^ammo-formations caused by ignorance concern all 20 kinds of volition including both ***abhiññāņa** **cetanā*** and ***uddhacca** **celanā**.* (***Abhi-A-2- 137**)* 

[Notes:  With  referring  to  some  ***Pāli***  Texts,  ***"tesam  vipāke  ñāņñāņam  attha Paṭisambhidād," (Abhi-2-309)*** etc, ***Mūlaṭīkā*** ***Sayadaw*** explained with many interrogations that it deserves to analyze on the fact, "the volition associated with unrest can not give rise to occur resultant consciousness, consciousness of process of NONE etc." (See ... ***Mūlaṭī-2- 95,97**)*] 

11. ***citta sańkhāra = manosañcetanā*** 

***manosañcetanā***  are  all  (29)  kinds  of  volition  which  occur  in  mind  door  without occurrence of both two kinds of bodily expression and verbally expression corporealities. That ***manosañcetanā*** is ***cittasańkhāra** **dhamma*** (= mental ***kamma**-*formation*).* Thus when infinite beings existing in infinite universes endeavour wholesome and unwholesome actions *(**kamma**)*  they  endeavour  through  these  three  doors  *(**dvāra**).*  These  fundamentals  of endeavouring, ***kamma** **dvāra*** had been shown clearly by the Buddha. *(**Abhi-A-2-137**)* 

**PAGE-364** 

12. **Way of paralleling between two triads *(tika)*** 

These  three  kinds  of  ***sańkhāra**,  **puññābhisańkhāra**,  **a-puññābhisańkhāra**, **āneñjābhisańkhāra**,*  must  be  recognized  as  the  first  triads  (***tika**).*  These  three  kinds  of ***sańkhāra**, **kāya** **sańkhāra**, **vacī** **sańkhāra**, **mano** **sańkhāra**,* must be recognized as the second triads. It should be understood way of paralleling between those triads. 

***Puññābhisańkhāra*** is ***kāya** **sańkhāra**,* sometimes, in the continuum of the person who  restraint  with  bodily  unwholesome  deeds.  Sometimes,  it  is  ***vacī**  **sańkhāra***  in  the continuum of the person who restraint with verbally unwholesome deeds. Thus, (8) kinds of great wholesome volition belong to all three kinds, ***puññābhisańkhāra**, **kāya** **sańkhāra**,* and 

***vacī** **sańkhāra**.* 

Then (13) kinds of volition, great wholesome volition and wholesome volition of fine- material sphere, which are occurring in mind-door, are both ***puññābhisańkhāra*** and ***citta** **sańkhāra**.* 

***A-puññābhisańkhāra*** is also ***kāya** **sańkhāra*** when bodily unwholesome deeds occur sometimes. Sometimes it is ***vacī** **sańkhāra*** when verbally unwholesome deeds occur. Without occurring in two doors, body-door and verbal door, when it occurs in mind-door only, it is 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE17

***citta** **sańkhāra**.* Thus ***a-puññābhisańkhāra*** can be occurred through ***kāya** **sańkhāra**, **vacī** **sańkhāra*** and ***mano** **sańkhāra**. (**Abhi**-**A-2-137**)* 

Because of lack of variation of ***āneñjābhisańkhāra*** as ***citta** **sańkhāra*** only, parallels between ***kāya** **sańkhāra*** etc, are not shown specially. *(**Mūlaṭī-2-98**)* 

Then  ***kāya**  **sańkhāra***  is  either  ***puññābhisańkhāra***  sometimes,  or  ***a- puññābhisańkhāra***  sometimes  but  never  ***āneñjābhisańkhāra**.  **Vacī**  **sańkhāra***  is  also  the same way as in ***kāya** **sańkhāra**.* On the other hands, ***citta** **sańkhāra*** is any kind of ***sańkhāra**s, **puññābhisańkhāra***  sometimes,  ***a-puññābhisańkhāra***  sometimes,  ***āneñjābhisańkhāra*** sometimes. 

In  this  way,  these  ***sańkhāra**s*  are  designated  as  ***sańkhāra**s*  which  occur  due  to occurrence of ignorance. 

13. **Question and answer** 

Why can it be known the fact that these ***kamma-***formation*s* occur due to occurrence of ignorance? It can be known in that way because ***kamma-***formations arise apparently as if the ignorance occurs obviously. It will be explained in detail as follows: - 

Such person has not removed delusion *(**moha**),* the opposite of knowledge, which is called the ignorance, inability to know correctly on the Four Noble Truths. Due to inability to know  and  see  penetratively  on  either  Noble  Truth  of  Suffering  *(**dukkha**  **sacca**)*  (=  five aggregates  which  are  dinged,  called  ***upādānakkhandhā**)*  or  previous  five  aggregates  etc called previous extremity of rounds of rebirth, that person endeavours ***kamma*-**foramtions and actions *(**kamma**)* which are fundamental causes of sufferings of that rounds of rebirth by obsessing as happiness (***sukha**)* on rounds of rebirth which is designated as sufferings of three kinds really, viz., ***dukkha** **dukkha**, **viparināma** **dukkha**, **sańkhāra** **dukkha*** by wise persons. 

**PAGE-365** 

Due to presence of inability to know and see penetratively on the Noble Truth of Cause of Suffering *(**samudaya** **sacca**),* such person endeavours ***kamma-*f**ormations*,* which are real fundamental causes of ***dukkha** **sacca**;* which are surroundings of the craving *(**taņhā**)* by obsessing as real causes of happiness, again. 

Furthermore - due to inability to know well on both the Noble Truth of Cessation of suffering *(**nirodha** **sacca**)* and the Noble Truth of Cause of Cessation of Suffering *(**magga** **sacca**);*  due  to  presence  of  reasoning  that  the  next  special  existences,  realm  of  neither- perception-nor-non-perception *(**ne'va saññā nā saññāyatana bhūmi**)* etc, which are not real cessation  of  suffering,  but  are  reasoned  as  the  apex  of  31  realms,  are  real  condition  of cessation of suffering; due to presence of reasoning on sacrificial offerings and practices not to  be  old  and  died  called  ***a-maratapa**,*  which  are  not  real  ways  of  practices  leading  to ***nibbāna**,* as real ways of practices; due to presence of strong desire to cease all sufferings, those  persons  endeavour  ***kamma-***formations*  by  means  of  sacrificial  offerings  and  ***a- maratapa*** as primary practices. 

***A-maratapa** -* due to presence of reasoning that it has the result called "never aging 
PAGE16

and death", very difficult practices, such as busking in the hot sunshine, warming by the heat of fire, etc, in summer, submerging in winter, etc, are called ***a-maratapa**.* It is similar to the goal of those persons who are practising alchemy delightfully in present days. In other words, - the term ***a-mara*** means heavenly being, *brahma,* with very long life-expectancy. The way of practice leading to reborn as heavenly being, *brahma* etc, is called ***a-maratapa**.* In other words - any kind of suicides with expectation to be happy, such as, poisoning, hanging, killing by him with knife, etc, is called ***a-maratapa**.* That way of practice called ***a-maratapa*** is  not  real  one  leading  to  ***nibbāna**.*  However,  it  means  that  those  persons  with  heavy ignorance endeavour ***kāya** **sańkhāra**, **vacī** **sańkhāra**, **mano** **sańkhāra*** by means of that ***a- maratapa*** primarily with wrong belief as real way of practice leading to ***nibbāna**. (**Mūlaṭī-2- 98**)* 

14. **How *puññabhisańkhāra* occurs due to ignorance (next method)** 

Furthermore - Due to inability to remove ignorance which as concealing Four Noble Truths not to know as they really are, especially due to incapability to know various kinds of sufferings which can be designated as result of wholesome ***dhamma*** mixing with so many faults, viz., suffering of birth, suffering of aging, suffering of decay, suffering of death etc, that person who lacks knowledge endeavours ***puññabhisańkhāra** (=* wholesome ***kamma-*** formation*)* called wholesome deeds of sensuous sphere and fine material sphere, which are of varied as three kinds, viz., ***kāya** **sańkhāra**, **vacī** **sańkhāra**, **citta** **sańkhāra**,* with the purpose of the Noble Truth of Suffering, could be attained. Charity, virtue, practices of ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā***  are  also  cultivated.  Then  he  endeavours  to  attain  absorptions  of  fine  material sphere again. 

**PAGE-366** 

Who is similar to that person? - Both very high *Sakka's* tree and very high mountain peak of *brahma* are called *maru.* It should be recognized that person is similar to a man who jumps down from apex of that tree or peak of that mountain due to presence of knowledge acquired through hearing as if one person jumps down from any place called *maru* he can be married  to  female  heavenly  being.  It  means  that  cultivation  of  various  kinds  of ***puññābhisańkhāra**,* which are depending upon rounds of rebirth *(**vaṭṭanissita**)* is similar to an act of jumping down the tree or chasm which is full of sufferings called birth, aging, decaying and death. It is because the happiness of human being, the happiness of heavenly being and the happiness of *brahma* are mixed together with various kinds of sufferings called birth, aging, decaying and death. 

Besides, even though how the happiness of human being, heavenly being, *brahma* is designated as great agreeable ones (***sukha**),* finally those resultant ***dhamma*** designating as ***sukha*** can cause huge burning at the moment facing with suffering of death called ***maraņa** **dukkha**.* Just before perish away the suffering of fire will be burning as big as the wealth they owned. Sometimes while they are existed before death they can face with suffering of change and  alteration  called  ***viparināma**  **dukkha***  of  their  wealth  and  happiness  unfortunately. Actually the pleasurable one called agreeable feeling which is acquired depending upon that wealth and happiness of human being, heavenly being, *brahma* is very minute. It is only just an instant but those sufferings as the investment to obtain that agreeable feeling become 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE19

greater and greater accordingly. Thus each kind of bliss that is actively acquired by human being, heavenly being, *brahma* is only one destined to occur sufferings for one day. However, as the moth come in contact with fire - as the man who has strong desire to taste a drop of honey  endeavours  to  lick  the  edge  of  razor  spreading  with  honey  -  those  persons  who strongly desire the wealth of human being, heavenly being, *brahma,* endeavour forcefully wholesome ***kamma-***formations called ***puññābhisańkhāra*** which are fundamental causes of sufferings, irrespective of those sufferings but wrong perception as happiness due to presence of very thick covering of ignorance. _(**Abhi**-**A-2-138;**_ **_Vs.2-162-163_**) 

15. **How *a-puññabhisańkhāra* occurs due to ignorance** 

The next kind \_\_\_\_ those beings existing in the hell who shouted as ***du-sa-na-so,*** had never known and seen the fact that "taking sensual pleasures, such as sexual misconduct (***kāmesumicchācāra**)*  etc,  is  followed  by  the  resultant  ***dhamma***  called  suffering  in ***lohakumbhī*** hell", while they were existed as human being. As the baby without knowledge plays happily with faces as a person who wants to die tries to drink poison - similarly those beings with ignorance also endeavour to do unwholesome deeds called ***a-puññābhisańkhāra*** by means of body, speech and mind, owing to inability to see faults as the result of taking five kinds of sensual pleasures viz., colour, sound, smell, taste, tactile, which are capable of occurring bad resultant ***dhamma**,* or owing to wrong perception as happiness, or owing to strong suppression of defilements *(**kilesā**),* lust etc. _(**Abhi-A-**_**2-138;Vs.2-163**) 

**PAGE-367** 

16. **How *āneñjābhisańkhāra* occurs due to ignorance** 

As a man who loses his bearings goes along with the road leading to ogre-city, due to inability to know and see penetratively on the faults of sufferings called ***sańkhāra** **dukkha**, **viparināma** **dukkha**,* of resultant ***dhamma*** of immaterial sphere, which are supreme ones in 31 realms, ***āneñjābhisańkhāra*** which is ***citta** **sańkhāra*** are also endeavoured with wrong knowing, wrong perception, wrong view, ***sassata diṭṭhi*** which holds eternalism, etc. (***Abhi**-**A-** 2-\3S;* Vs.2-163) 

In this way, this nature, "these ***kamma-***formations have the causal ***dhamma*** called ignorance apparently," can be known because only when the ignorance is obviously present, can  those  ***kamma-***formations  be  occurred  apparently  and  unless  the  former  is  obviously present, the latter can not be occurred apparently. The evidence found in ***Pāli*** Text is as follows. \_\_\_\_ 

***avidvā  bhikkhave   avijjāgato  puññābhisańkhārampi   abhisańkhāroti,   a- puññābhisańkhārampi  abhisańkhāroti,  āneñjābhisańkhārampi  abhisańkhāroti.  yato  ca kho bhikkhave bhikkhuno avijjā pahīnā, vijjā uppannā, so avijjāvirāgā vijjuppādā ne' va puññābhisańkhāram abhisańkhāroti. (Abhi.A.2.138,139;* Vs.2.163)** 

***Bhikkhus** ...* the being lacking penetrative knowledge on Four Noble Truths but with full  of  ignorance,  endeavours  to  perform  any  kind  of  ***puññābhisańkhāra**,  **a-puññābhi*** 
PAGE18

***sańkhāra**,* or ***āneñjabhisańkhāra**. **Bhikkhus** ...* the ***bhikkhu*** can remove ignorance for such time,  the  knowledge  called  ***vijjā***  occurs  as  a  result.  At  that  time  that  ***bhikkhu***  does  not endeavours  to  perform  any  kind  of  ***kamma-***formation*s,  **puññābhisańkhāra**,  **a- puññābhisańkhāra*** or ***āneñjābhisańkhāra*** due to occurrence of removing of ignorance and due to occurrence of knowledge. (It has the same meaning as ***Parivīmamsana** **sutta**, **Sam-l- 310**.)* 

[Among  those  losing  ***sutta***  of  ***Samyutta  Nikāya***  that  ***sutta***  referred  in  above commentary can also be included. At the span of time associated with commentators that ***sutta*** may be obviously present.] 

These  are  explanations  to  be  understood  how  ***kamma-***formations  occur  due  to ignorance. The ***meditator*** must discern how ***kamma-***formations occur due to ignorance by penetrative  knowledge  of  him.  With  referring  to  this  explanation, *"**avijjā** **sańkhārā  atīto addhā**",* this fact should not be forgotten that the ignorance and ***kamma-***formations which are fundamental  causes  of  resultant  ***dhamma***  called  consciousness  of  process  of  NONE, mentality and corporeality, bases, contact, feeling, that are belonging to present life, were those ***dhamma*** occurred in previous lives, previous period only. 

**PAGE-368**  

17. **An example to be easy understood** 

When those corporealities and mentalities occurring in both internal and external has been discerned and kept in mind thoroughly as mentioned in the fifth method of Dependent- Origination, it should be scrutinized toward past with desire to know causal ***dhammas*** of these corporealities and mentalities. It is better as if previous causal ***dhammas*** can be found by the help of light of knowledge. If it is not found, it must be scrutinized causal ***dhammas*** by  discerning  on  corporealities  and  mentalities  occurring  in  present  practising  period  as beginning and then discerning toward those occurring in birth process gradually as mentioned previously in fifth method. Here it will be presented the next example again. 

After those corporealities and mentalities occurring in present life from the present practising  period  to  the  birth  process  were  kept  in  mind,  when  causal  ***dhammas***  were scrutinized by sending penetrative knowledge toward death consciousness of previous life, the  object  of  ***kamma***  called  ***puññābhisańkhāra***  through  virtue  which  was  achieved  as manship existence, has been found. Then when it is continued to scrutinize his aim why did that man restraint with virtue, it was found as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

In the continuum of corporealities and mentalities occurring during restraining with virtue, it was found his aim that "he wanted to become womanship existence in order to serve satisfactorily  her  parents  as  womanship  existence  due  to  lack  of  opportunity  to  serve satisfactorily his parents as manship existence. 

He is similar to a man who jumps down from apex of ***Sakka's*** tree or mountain peak *of Brahma* due to through hearing as if one person jumps down from any place called *maru, Sakka's*  tree  or  mountain peak  of *brahma,*  he  can be  married  to  female  heavenly  being, indeed. 

At that time it has been found that ***bhavańga*** mind clearness of present life and that of 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE21

previous life during restraining with virtue, in other words, continuum of mental process of present life and that of mental process of previous life during restraining with virtue, is single continuum of processes continuously when it is scrutinized thoroughly. 

***sabhāvovāyam citassa paņdaratā.** (**Mūlaṭī**-**1-125, paragraph-436***) 

All  kinds  of  consciousness  have  the  nature  of  clear  white  and purified. Not  only 

***bhavańga***  mind  clearness  but  also  all  consciousness  occurring  in  continuum  of  mental process is clear and purified. Therefore that ***meditator*** found single continuum of processes continuously when ***bhavańga*** mind clearness of present life and that of previous life, in other words, continuum of mental processes of present life and that mental processes of previous life are scrutinized thoroughly. Not only  continuum of mental processes but also that of corporeal processes is single continuum of processes continuously as stretching thread. It can be said he knows the ***ekatta* way.** 

**PAGE-369** 

Then that ***meditator*** continues to scrutinize in order to know ***nānatta*** way and he sees as follows. - These are three kinds of ***kilesa vaṭṭa*** (defilement round), 

1. ignorance (***avijjā**) =* the nature of wrong knowing as woman who was capable of serving parents 
2. craving *(**taņhā**) =* the nature of attaching that womanship existence 
2. clinging *(**upddāna**)* = the nature of clinging to that womanship existence. 

**Those** ***kilesa vaṭṭa*** (defilement round) occur in the mind-door cognitive **process orderly as follows \_\_\_\_** 

1. mind-door advertence (***manodvārāvajjana**)* ....................(1) time 
1. impulsions *(**javana**).........................................................* (7) times 
1. registering *(**tad-ārammaņa**).............................................* (2) times Those mind moments consist of 
1. (12) mind and mental concomitants for mind door advertence, 
2. (20) mind and mental concomitants for each impulsion and 
3. (12) mind and mental concomitants for each registering respectively. 

Those impulsions are belonging to greed-wrong view *(**lobhadiṭhi**)* group. Then when volitional groups of virtue (= ***puññābhisańkhāra**)* which occurred due to those ***kilesa vaṭṭa**,* are scrutinized it is found as follows: 

1. mind-door advertence ... (1) time, consisting of (12) mind and mental concomitants, 
1. impulsions ... (7) times, each consists of (34) mind and mental concomitants, 
3. registering  ...  (2)  times,  each  consists  of  (34)  mind  and  mental  concomitants respectively. 

These groups of mental ***dhamma*** of mind-door cognitive process are ***kamma** **vaṭṭa** (=* action round). The impu1sion is first  kind of great wholesome consciousness belongs to faith-wisdom  *(**saddhā  –paññā**)*  group.***  Each  impulsion  has  (34)  mind  and  mental 
PAGE20

concomitants  respectively.  In  this  case,  it  is  only  abstinence  with  resolution  *(**samādāna virati**)* but not abstinence by reaching *(**sampatta virati**)* resulting in absence of ***virati cetasika*** (mental concomitant called abstinence). [It means only the period when the action which gives  rise  to  occur  the  result  was  performing.]  These  are  groups  of  ***dhammas***  called ***puññabhisańkhāra**.* It can be called ***nānatta*** way has being known because it is capable of knowing on those groups of ***dhammas*** called ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa**,*** 

***kamma** **vaṭṭa*** of which each compactness of mentality *(**nāmaghana**)* is broken down by  penetrative  knowledge  up  to  reach  the  specific  character  of  each  ultimate  ***dhamma*** respectively. 

Numerous mind-door cognitive processes of those ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa*** had been occurred in previous  life.  Numerous  mind-door  cognitive  processes  of  ***kamma**  **vaṭṭa***  had  also  been occurred similarly, indeed. 

**PAGE-370** 

18. **Table showing sequence of cognitive process of *kilesa vaṭṭa* and *kamma vaṭṭa*** 



|Mind-door advertence |<p>Impulsions </p><p>(7) times </p>|<p>Registering </p><p>(2) times </p>|
| - | - | - |
|***kilesa** **vaṭṭa*** |12 |20 |12 |
|***kamma** **vaṭṭa*** |12 |34 |34 |
[**Notes:\_\_\_\_**  In this case, experience of one ***meditator*** has been shown as an example. It may or may not be associated with ***pīti** (=* pleasurable interest) depending upon kind of feeling, ***somanassa*** (agreeable feeling) or ***upekkhā** (=* neutrality feeling) in ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa**.* It may or may  not  be  associated  with  ***ṭhiņa  middha***  (=  sloth  torpor)  depending  ***sasańkhārika***  (= prepared) or ***a-sańkhārika*** (= unprepared). It may or may not be fallen into registering *(tad- **ārammaņa**).* If it is fallen, all 11 kinds of registerings can fall accordingly. Similarly, in ***kamma** **vaṭṭa**,* it may or may not be associated with ***paññā*** (= knowledge) and ***pīti*** depending upon ***nāna sampayutta*** or ***nāna vipayutta*** and ***somanassa*** or ***upekkhā**.* It may or may not be fallen into registering. If it is fallen, all 11 kinds of registerings can fall accordingly. The ***meditator*** must discern in order to see by penetrative knowledge as real conditions occurring in previous continuum of mentality of him. Then both causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be discerned and kept in mind by seeing occurrence of mind-door cognitive process of ***kamma** **vaṭṭa*** due to mind-door cognitive process of ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa*** with relating to the phrase, ***avijjā** **paccaya** **sańkhāra*** (= ***kamma-***formations occur due to the ignorance). It must be recognized beforehand  that  it  must  be  carried  out  ***vipassanā***  practice  on  those  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas*** when it will be reached into ***vipassanā*** stage.] 

Those groups of ***sańkhāra** **dhammas*** called ***kamma** **vaṭṭa*** mentioned above, in other words, mental continuum of mind-door cognitive process of ***kamma** **vaṭṭa**,* in other words, those  mental  ***dhammas***  occurring  in  the  continuum  of  mind-door  cognitive  processes  of ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa*** and ***kamma** **vaṭṭa**,* pass away after arisen due to occurrence of impermanent ***dhamma*** (= ***anicca** **dhamma**)* really. However it never disappears without embedding any potentiality of ***kamma*** in the continuum of corporeality and mentality. It usually passes away after potentiality of ***kamma*** which is capable of producing any kind of existence expected by 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE23

those  persons  who  cultivate  ***sańkhāra***  (=  ***kamma-***formation*s)*  and  ***kamma**,*  had  been embedded in the continuum of corporeality and mentality. The ***meditator*** must discern those ***kamma-***formations in order to see that potentiality of ***kamma**,* which had been embedded in the continuum of corporeality and mentality when those ***kamma-***formations* passed away by means  of  penetrative  knowledge  which  is  capable  of  keeping  in  mind  mental  groups  of ***kamma-***formations. 

The ***meditator*** shown as an example mentioned above does a kind of person desire to become womanship existence that has opportunity to serve satisfactorily parents. With the aim of attaining that womanship existence wholesome ***kamma-***formations through virtue had been cultivated successfully. When that ***meditator*** continues to scrutinize causal relationship between that potentiality *of **kamma*** and groups of corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** which are led by consciousness of process of NONE of present existence he sees the occurrence of resultant  ***dhamma***  called  birth  process  due  to  that  potentiality  of  ***kamma***  of  previous existence by penetrative knowledge. At that time, in the continuity of consciousness of that ***meditator*** the following knowledge occur correctly.  

**PAGE-371** 

1. There is no doer, creator, person, being, self *(**atta**),* superior self *(**paramatta**)* in the aspect of causal 

***dhamma**.* 

2. There is also no person who is made, created person, self, living self *(**jīva** **atta**)* in the aspect of resultant ***dhamma**.* 
2. **It** knows as mass of causal ***dhamma*** called corporeality and mentality, and mass of resultant ***dhamma*** called corporeality and mentality only. (In this stage, knowing on ***ekatta* way** and ***nanatta* way** is inclusive because penetrative knowledge is reaching to the ultimate sense.) 
2. Then it is knowing and seeing on the nature of lack of endeavouring *(**vyāpāra**)* of 

both  aspects  of  causal  ***dhamma***  called  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  ***kamma-*** formation*,* action, in order to occur resultant ***dhamma**,* and ... 

5. In the aspect of resultant ***dhamma*** called corporeality and mentality of birth process as  "if  causal  ***dhammas***  occur,  resultant  ***dhamma**,*  they  themselves,  will  occur apparently". It is well understood on ***a-vydpdra* way.** 
5. Then due to seeing on the occurrence of resultant ***dhammas*** which are corresponding to causal ***dhammas**,* such as corporeality and mentality of birth process which are produced  by  causal  ***dhammas***  called  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  ***kamma-*** formation*,* action, it is known as ***evam dhammatd* way** has been well understood. This is a way of presentation by which causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** are set  forth  as  separate  groups.  If  it  is  presented  in  accordance  with  the  first  method  of Dependence-Origination *(**paṭiccasamuppāda**),* it will be as follows: - 

The  nature  of  wrong  knowing  as  womanship  existence  with  opportunity  to  serve satisfactorily  parents  is  the  ignorance  *(**avijjā**).*  (It  is  continuum  of  mind-door  cognitive processes of ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa*** that is led by the ignorance.) 

Due  to  presence  of  that  ignorance,  ***puññābhisańkhāra***  called  wholesome  deed through virtue is cultivated. (= That continuum of mind door cognitive processes of ***kamma*** 
PAGE22

***vaṭṭa**,* which are led by wholesome volition through virtue, is cultivated.) 

Those  continuum  of  corporeality  and  mentality  when  ignorance  occurred  and continuum of corporeality and mentality when wholesome ***kamma-***formation through virtue occurred  are  seen  by  knowledge  as  unique  continuum  of  corporeality  and  mentality continuously. Then continuum of corporeality and mentality together with those ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa**,* and  ***kamma**  **vaṭṭa***  or  ignorance  and  ***kamma-***formations  occurred  and  continuum  of corporeality  and  mentality,  up  to  birth  process  of  present  existence,  are  also  seen  by knowledge as unique continuum of corporeality and mentality continuously. It is known as ***ekatta* way** has been well understood. 

Then specific character of each ultimate element occurring in every mind moment is seen by penetrative knowledge after masses of mentality called compactness of continuity *(**santatighana**),*  compactness  of  form  *(**samūhaghana**),*  compactness  of  function *(**kiccaghana**)* of that continuum of mind-door cognitive processes of ***kilesa** **vaṭṭa**,* which was led by the ignorance and continuum of mind-door cognitive processes of ***kamma** **vaṭṭa**,* which was led by wholesome volition through virtue, has been broken down. It is known as ***nānatta* way** has been well understood. Similarly corporeality and mentality of birth process are also seen by penetrative knowledge up to the field of ultimate sense. It is also known as ***nānatta*** **way** has been well understood. 

**PAGE-372** 

The  nature  of  lack  of  endeavouring  in  one  aspect  of  causal  ***dhamma***  called  the ignorance in order to occur resultant ***dhamma*** called ***sańkhāra*** and the nature of lack of endeavouring,  "as  if  the  ignorance  occurs  apparently,  we,  ourselves  called  ***sańkhāra** **dhamma***  will  occur  apparently",  in  one  aspect  of  resultant  ***dhammas***  called  ***sańkhāra** **dhammas**,* are seen by penetrative knowledge. It is known as ***a-vyāparā* way** has been well understood. It should be understood the occurrence of ***viññāņa*** (consciousness of process of NONE) due to ***sańkhāra** (**kamma-***formations*)* in the same way. 

It  is  seeing  on  occurrence  of pertinent  resultant ***dhamma***  called ***sańkhāra***  due  to presence of the cause called the ignorance and on non-occurrence of inpertinent resultant ***dhamma*** by penetrative knowledge.  It is known as ***evam dhammatd* way** has been well understood. 

The ***meditator*** should firmly recognize that it is very essential to try in order to know above  four  ways,  viz.,  ***ekatta**,  **nānatta**,  **a-vyāparā**  and.  evam  **dhamma**td*  ways  during discerning on how ***kamma-***formations occur due to ignorance and how consciousness of process of NONE occurs due to ***kamma-***formation*s,* etc, successively. 

**PAGE-373** 

***2.3  Buddhist Philosophy of Conditional Relations*** 

There is a reasonable question that how causal ***dhammas*** benefit the occurrence of resultant ***dhammas*** and what kinds of relations *(**paccaya**)* are involved in those processes 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE25

with  referring  to  explanations,  ***kamma-***formations  occur  apparently  due  to  presence  of ignorance, in other words, resultant ***dhammas*** occur apparently due to presence of causal ***dhammas*** in those noble preachings of ***Paṭiccasamuppāda**.* In this section it will be presented on brief account of (24) relations in order to be understood doctrine of causal relationship systematically. 

1. ***Twenty four relations in Pāli*** 

***hetupaccayo,    ārammaņapaccayo,    adhipatipaccayo,    anantarapaccayo,   samanantarapaccayo,  sahajātapaccayo,  aññamaññapaccayo,  nissayapaccayo,    upanissayapaccayo,  purejātapaccayo,  pacchājātapaccayo,  āsevanapaccayo, kammapaccayo,  vipākapaccayo,  āhārapaccayo,  indriyapaccayo,  jhānapaccayo,  maggapaccayo,   sampayuttapaccayo,  vipayuttapaccayo,   atthipaccayo,  natthipaccayo, vigatapaccayo, avigatapaccayoti. (Paṭṭhāna.l.1)*** 

It  will  be  presented  translation  of  twenty  four  relations  according  to  Buddhist Philosophy of Relations (BPR) and Guide through the ***Abhidhamma Piṭaka*** (GAP) and terms used in this paper in the following table. 

**Twenty Four Relations** 



||***Paccaya***  |Relation (BPR)  |Relation (GAP)  |Relation (this book)  |
| :- | - | - | - | - |
|1  |***hetu***  |Condition or root  |Root  |Root  |
|2  |***ārammaņa***  |Object  |Object  |Object  |
|3  |***adhipati***  |Dominance  |Predominance  |Predominance  |
|4  |***anantara***  |Contiguity  |Proximity  |Contiguity  |
|5  |***samanantara***  |Immediate contiguity  |Contiguity  |Immediate contiguity  |
|6  |***sahajāta***  |Co-existence  |Co-nascence  |Compatibility  |
|7  |***aññamañña***  |Reciprocity  |Mutuality  |Mutuality  |
|8  |***nissaya*** |Dependence  |Support  |Dependence  |
|9  |***upanissaya***  |Sufficing condition  |Decisive support  |Determinative dependence  |
|10  |***purejāta***  |Pre-existence  |Pre-nascence  |Pre-compatibi lity  |
|11  |***pacchājāta***  |Post-existence  |Post-nascence  |Post-compatibility  |
|12  |***āsevana***  |Habitual recurrence  |Frequency  |Habitual recurrence  |
|13  |***kamma***  |***kamma** /* action  |***karma***  |***kamma**/* action |
|14  |***vipāka***  |Effect  |***karma*** result  |***kamma***  (Consequence) |
|15  |***āhāra***  |Food  |Nutriment  |Nutriment  |
|16  |***indriya***  |Control  |Faculty  |Controlling faculty  |
|17  |***jhāna***  |***jhāna**/* ecstasy  |***jhāna***  |Absorption  |
|18  |***magga***  |Path  |Path  |Path  |

PAGE24



|19  |***sampayutta***  |Association  |Association  |Association  |
| - | - | - | - | - |
|20  |***vipayutta***  |Dissociation  |Dissociation  |Dissociation  |
|21  |***atthi***  |Presence  |Presence  |Presence  |
|22  |***natthi***  |Absence  |Absence  |Absence  |
|23  |***vigata***  |Abeyance  |Disappearance  |Disappearance  |
|24  |***avigata***  |Continuance  |Non-disappearance  |Non-disappearance  |
2. ***The relation by way of root* (*hetu*-*paccaya*)*** 

The word, ***hetu*** means root (= ***mūla**).* Those three kinds, greed *(**lobha**),* hate *(**dosa**),* delusion  *(**moha**),***  are**  roots  of  unwholesome  ***dhammas.***  It  is  known  as  ***a-kusala  mūla dhamma***  or ***a-kusala  hetu**.*  Those  three  kinds*,*  greedlessness  (***a-lobha***),*  hatelessness  (***a- dosa***)*  non-delusion*  (***a-moha***),*  are  roots  of  wholesome  ***dhammas***  and  some  ***abyākata*** ***dhammas***.* It is known as ***kusala*** ***mūla dhammas*** and ***abydkata mūla dhamma***.* It is also known as ***kusala*** ***hetu*** and ***abyākata hetu***. 

***2.3.2.1 Cause (= paccaya*)*** 

***paccayoti ettha pana ayam vacanattho, paṭicca etasmā etīti paccayo. apaccakkhāya nam vattatīti attho. yo hi dhammo yam dhammam apaccakkhāya tiṭṭhati vā uppajjati vā, so tassa paccayoti vuttam hoti. lakkhaņato pana upakārakalakkhaņo paccayo. yo hi dhammo yassa  dhammassa  ṭhitiyā  vā  uppattiyā  vā  upakārako  hoti,  so  tassa  paccayoti  vuccati. paccayo,  hetu,  kāraņam,  nidānam,  sambhavo,  pabhavotiādi  atthato  ekam,  byañjanato nānam.  iti  mūlaṭṭthena  hetu,  upakārakaṭṭhena  paccayoti  sańkhepato  mūlaṭṭhena upakārako dhammo hetupaccayo. (Abhi.A.3.344;* Vs.2.164)** 

The resultant ***dhamma*** occurs and stands depending upon this causal ***dhamma**.* Due to occurrence  of  cause  of  resultant ***dhamma*** in  order  to  occur  depending  on  it,  that  causal ***dhamma*** is called ***paccaya*** (= cause). It means that it occurs and stands without rejecting on that causal ***dhamma**.* It will be explicit. - Such resultant ***dhamma*** not only occurs but also stands without rejecting and avoiding from such causal ***dhamma**.* That causal ***dhamma*** is the cause of that resultant ***dhamma*** to be occurred and to be stood indeed. 

**PAGE-374** 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_  The  relation  of  post-compatibility  *(**pacchājāta  paccaya**)  (=*  succeedent occurring  groups  of  mental ***dhammas**)* benefit preceding  corporeal ***dhammas***  in  order  to stand  for  static  stage  *(**ṭhiti**)*  but  not  in  order  to  occur  for  arising  stage  *(**uppāda**).*  Those relations *(**paccaya**),*  condition of contiguity *(**anantara** **paccaya**)* etc, (= preceding mental ***dhammas**)* benefit succeeding mental ***dhammas*** in order to occur (= arising stage) but not in order to stand for static stage. Those relations, the relation by way of root *(**hetu** **paccaya**)* etc, benefit succeeding mental ***dhammas*** in order to occur and stand for two kinds of stages, the arising and static stages. Therefore it is explained by indefmiteness meaning *(**aniyamattha**),* 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE27

the term ***vā**,* as ***tiṭṭhati vā uppajjati vā**.* The term ***tiṭṭhati*** is the occurrence by  means of standing for static stage *(**ṭhiti**)* while the term ***uppajjati*** is the occurrence by means of arising in the sub-moment, arising stage *(**uppāda** **khaņa**).*] 

According  to  above  explanations,  it  should  be  recognized  on  causal  ***dhamma***  as ***paccaya*** (relation) while on resultant ***dhamma*** as ***paccayuppanna**.* 

***2.3.2.B.upak*ā*raka lakkhaņā*** 

The meaning of the term ***paccaya**,* the cause, is ***saddattha*** (= grammatical meaning) while  the  meaning  of  ***upakāraka***  is  ***lakkhaņattha***  which  shows  the  nature  of  all  causal ***dhammas**.* It is ***sabhāva** **lakkhaņa*** (= natural specific character). 

***upakāra***  means  effectiveness  to  finish  (=  function),  ***paccayuppanna***  (=  resultant ***dhamma**)* with correspondent quality. The functioning on that way means ability to occur and stand the resultant ***dhamma*** which is corresponding to causal ***dhamma**.* It means that causal ***dhamma***  make  resultant  ***dhamma***  in  order  to  occur  and  stand  in  a  situation  which  is corresponding to causal ***dhamma**.* The effectiveness in that way can be said that the causal ***dhamma*** benefits resultant ***dhamma*** called ***paccayuppanna*** in order to occur and stand for the latter. That causal ***dhamma*** which is capable of benefiting for that resultant ***dhamma*** is designated as **"cause** *(**paccaya**)”.* 

In  brief,  those  causal  ***dhammas***  called  six  kinds  of  roots,  which  are  capable  of functioning in order to occur and stand corresponding resultant ***dhammas*** by way of root, are called ***hetu** **paccaya*** (= the relation by way of root). 

**2.3.2.C The meaning of root** (***mūlaṭṭha)*** 

***laddhahetupaccayā hi dhammā virūļhamūlā viya pādapā thirā honti suppaṭṭhitā, ahetukā  tilavījakādisevālā  viya  na  suppatiṭṭhitā.  iti  mūlaṭṭhena  upakārakoti suppatiṭṭhitabhāvasādhanena  upakārako  dhammo  hetupaccayoti  veditabbo.  (Abhi-A-3- 345;* Vs.2-165)** 

**Root  *(hetu)***  is  efficacy  to  function  the  occurrence  of  well  standing  of  resultant ***dhamma**.* As those trees with prosperous roots are stable and standing well, ***paccayuppanna** **dhamma*** with acquired causes of roots *(**hetu** **paccaya**)* are stable and standing well. On the other hand\_\_\_\_ as algae, duckweed etc, are free floating and can not stand well, rootless ***dhammas*** are unable to stand well. Therefore, with regarding to the phrase\_\_\_\_ "which are capable of functioning in order to occur and stand corresponding resultant ***dhamma*** by way of root",\_\_\_\_  it should be recognized that six kinds of roots, which are capable of benefiting resultant  ***dhammas***  in  order  to  present  corresponding  qualities  with  causal  ***dhammas***  by means  of  finishing  to  occur  well  standing  of  ***paccayuppanna**  **dhamma**.*  (It  should  be understood the relation of object *(**ārammaņa** **paccaya**)* etc in the same way.) 

**PAGE-375** 

**Benefit** - In the phrase, causal ***dhammas*** benefit ***paccayuppanna** **dhammas**;* it should 
PAGE26

be recognized that (1) it causes the occurrence of ***paccayuppanna*** which has not occurred yet and (2) supporting on occurring of ***paccayuppanna** **dhamma*** to be stable, are designated as "be benefited". 

**2.3.2.D *paccaya* and *paccayuppanna* (cause and result)** 

_**hetū**  **hetu**  **sampayuttakānam  dhammānam  tam  samuṭṭhānānañca  rūpānam hetupaccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna.l.l)**_** 

Those  ***dhammas*** of ***hetu paccaya***  are  six  kinds  of  roots *(**hetu**),*  viz.,  greed,  hate, delusion, greedlessness, hatelessness, non-delusion. 

Those** resultant ***dhammas* of the relation of root** are (71) kinds of consciousness with root *(**sahetuka citta**),* (52) kinds of mental concomitants, excluding delusion *(**moha**)* in two kinds of consciousness rooted in delusion, corporealities produced by mind (CPM) *(**cittaja** **rūpa**)* during being is happening *(**pavatti**),* corporealities produced by ***kamma*** (CPK) with root  during  process  of  newly  occurrence  of  next  existence  (NONE)'  *(**paṭisandhi  sahetu kammaja rūpa**).* 

Corporealities produced by ***kamma*** (CPK) during process of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* is arising  and  corporealities produced by  mind  (CPM)  which  are  occurring  during being  is happening *(**pavatti**),* are compatible corporealities *(**sahajāta** **rūpa**)* which are related to six roots correspondingly. It should be recognized on the fact that that group of causal ***dhammas*** of present moment is referred as causality within only one mind-moment because causal ***dhammas*** called six roots benefit associating mental aggregates within one mind-moment and ***paccayuppanna** **dhamma*** called compatible corporeallities (***sahajāta** **rūpa**)* only. Causal ***dhammas*** are groups of mentalities while resultant ***dhammas*** are both two kinds, mental and corporeal ***dhammas**.*  This  relation by  way  of  root *(**hetu** **paccaya**),*  therefore,  is  causality through which mentality benefits both mentality and corporeality. 

*"**kammam khettam, viññanam vījam, taņhāsaneho**". **(Ańg.1-224)*** 

1. the action (***kamma**)* is similar to a field while ... 
1. the  consciousness  of  newly  occurrence  of  next  existence  (NONE)  (=  ***paṭisandhi** **viññāņa**)* is similar to seed, 
1. the craving *(**taņhā**)* to sticky water. ***(Ańg.1-224)*** 

In this case, the reason "why those ***dhammas*** called relation by way of roots *(**hetu** **paccaya** **dhamma**)* benefit CPK which are occurring during NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* is arising but it does not benefit CPK which are occurring during being is happening *(**pavatti**)",* is the fact that CPK which are occurring during NONE is arising is related to "consciousness of NONE" *(**paṭisandhi**  **viññāņa**).*  During  NONE  is  arising  CPK  have  got  occurrence  related  to consciousness of NONE. It is right.- By the time that NONE is arising, consciousness of NONE is unable to produce CPM. *(*The reason why it is unable to produce CPM can be seen in Volume I, Section 4, ***rūpa** **kammaṭṭhāna**.)* 

` `Those CPK have opportunity to occur only when consciousness of NONE arises but the former **are** unable to occur and stand without the latter. Therefore the Buddha preached as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-376** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE29

***viññāņņapaccayā nāmarūpam.  .tasmim patiṭṭhite viññāņe virūļhe nāmarūpassa avakkanti hoti. (Sam.1.296)*** 

"Due to presence of consciousness of process of NONE/ corporeality and mentality of NONE  occur.  When  that  consciousness  of process  of NONE  stands,  the  opportunity  for corporeality  and  mentality  of  NONE  occurs",  preached  by  the  Buddha.  (Second  ***Cetanā** **Sutta**, **Kaļāra Vagga, Nidāna Vagga Samyutta**)*." 

Then during being is happening *(**pavatti**)* those CPK are occurring related to ***kamma*** (= action) although mind (= consciousness) is apparently absent. It is no occurrence related to mind. It is **right.** - It is because those CPK continue to occur in the continuum of a Never- Returner  *(**anāgāmī**)*  and  an  Arahant  who  are  entering  in  cessation  absorption  *(**nirodha** **samāpatti**).* 

Furthermore, due to inability to produce CPM by consciousness of NONE only CPK stands as representative of CPM of consciousness of process of NONE. That consciousness **of** process of NONE stands as the seed of CPK only. The action *(**kamma**)* is similar to a cultivated expanse **of** (and where those CPK are growing up. Those defilements *(**kilesa**),* the 

craving etc, are similar to water. 

Therefore as a plant can be occurred due to efficiency of seed for** beginning process of germination through both field and water are present apparently, those all kinds of CPK** can be occurred due to efficiency of consciousness of NONE at the moment of process of NONE. 

It should be recognized that "as successive development of plant can be occurred due to efficiency of field and water although the seed perished away after germination, similarly CPK  can  be  occurred  due  to  ***kamma***  without  consciousness  of  NONE  during  being  is happening *(**pavatti**).* The Buddha, therefore preached that- 

1. The action *(**kamma**)* is similar to a field, while 
1. consciousness of process of NONE is similar to seed, 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\1.       *"**paṭisandhi*** is most frequently translated as **reincarnation** or **rebirth.** In ***Pāli* English** Dictionary it is translated as reunion (of vital principle with a body), reincarnation, metempsychosis etc. 

The  meaning  of  reincarnation  is  explained  in  The  American  Heritage**  Dictionary  of**  the  English Language as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

**re.in.car.na.tion** \_\_\_ **n.** 1**.** Rebirth of the soul in another body. 2. A reappearance or** revitalization in another form; a new embodiment. 

The meaning of rebirth is explained in that Dictionary as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

**re.birth** \_\_\_\_**n.** 1.A second or New birth; reincarnation. 2.A renaissance; a revival 

Therefore both two words, reincarnation and rebirth, have the same meaning** and are not appropriate terms for the real meaning of ***paṭisandhi**.* According to the philosophical doctrine of the Buddha, there is no soul nor self (***atta***) which is indestructible one. The real meaning of ***paṭisandhi*** is the process of **n**ewly **o**ccurrence of **n**ext **e**xistence (**NONE**), in the aspect of conventional reality *(**vohāra sacca**).* In this book, therefore, it will be applied on translation** of ***“paṭisandhi",*** as "process of NONE", in order to be easy understood as a personal communication index (PCI). 

Similarly the following terms will be applied as PCI. 

***kammaja** **rūpa**,* corporealities produced by ***kamma*** (CPK) 

***cittaja** **rūpa**,* corporealities produced by mind (CPM) 

***utuja rūpa**,* corporealities produced by temperature (CPT) 

***āhārqja rūpa**,* corporealities produced by nutriment (CPN) etc. 

\3.     the craving, to sticky water, respectively. *(**Abhi.A.III. 355,356***) 

**PAGE-377** 
PAGE28

3. ***ārammaņa paccaya* (the relation of object)** 

The ***dhamma*** which is capable of benefiting by means of object *(**ārammaņa**)* is called ***ārammaņa** **paccaya*** (relation **of object).** As a weak wan rises or stands upright by leaning upon either walking stick or rope, similarly, mind and mental concomitants occur and stand by taking the objects, colour-object etc. Therefore it should be recognised that six kinds of objects of mind and mental concomitants are ***ārammaņa** **paccaya*** (the relation of object). ***(Abhi-A-*III-14*5, Vs.II.*165)** 

Those ***dhammas*** called ***ārammaņa paccaya*** are six kinds of objects, 

Those ***dhammas*** called ***ārammaņa paccayuppanna*** are groups of consciousness and mental concomitants. 

*(***Notes:\_\_\_\_**  In ***vipassanā*** stage, those objects of ***vipassanā*** knowledge are (28) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** and mundane mind and concomitants. In the aspect of ***ārammaņika*** (resultant  ***dhammas***  which  are  capable  of  taking  objects),  there  are  mental  ***dhammas*** occurring in six lines mentioned in __Volume II, Section 5, *nāma kammaṭṭhāna).*__*)* 

By means of ***ārammaņa** **paccaya*** (the relation of object), 

1. visible-object  benefits  groups  of  mental  ***dhammas***  called  mind  and  mental concomitants of eye-door cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process, which are occurring by taking colour-object. 
1. auditory-object  benefits  groups  **of**  mental  ***dhammas***  called  mind  and  mental concomitants of ear-door cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process, which are occurring **by** taking sound-object, 
1. olfactory-object  benefits  groups  **of**  mental  ***dhammas***  called  mind  and  mental concomitants  of  nose-door  cognitive  process  and  mind-door  cognitive  process, which are occurring by taking smell-object, 
1. sapid-object  benefits  groups  of  mental  ***dhammas***  called  mind  and  mental concomitants of tongue-door cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process, which are occurring by taking taste-object, 
1. tangible-object  benefits  groups  of  mental  ***dhammas***  called  mind  and  mental concomitants  of  body-door  cognitive  process  and  mind-door  cognitive  process, which are occurring by taking tangible-object, 
1. Ideational-object  *(**dhammārammaņa**)*  benefits  groups  of  mental  ***dhammas***  called mind and mental concomitants of mind-door cognitive process, which are occurring by taking ideational-object *(**dhammārammaņa**).* 

It is kind of relation similar to a relation in which those causal ***dhammas**,* viz., (1) concept *(**paññatti**)* (2) mentality (3) corporeality, benefit resultant mental ***dhamma**.* Causal ***dhammas*** include all kinds of ultimate ***dhammas*** of corporeality and mentality within three periods, i.e., past. future and present, and ***nibbāna*** and concept which are freed from time. Those objects of concept, sign of full-concentration of ***kasiņa*** and sign of full concentration of ***ānāpāna**,* which are ideational-objects. are also included in causal ***dhammas**.* Sign of full-

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE31

concentration of ***kasiņa*** benefits mental ***dhammas*** of absorptions of ***kasiņa*** and sign of ftUl- concentration of ***ānāpāna*** benefits ***mental dhammas*** of absorptions of ***ānāpāna*** by means of relation of object *(**ārammaņa** **paccaya**).* Therefore It should bo recognized the following fact as summary. 

***yam yam dhammam ārabba ye ye dhammā uppajjanti cittacetasikā dhammā. te te dhammā tesam tesam dhammānam ārammaņa paccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna.1.2)*** 

**PAGE-378** 

- By means of taking any object either concept or ultimate ones (***paramattha***), such such 

***dhammas*** of mind and mental concomitants occur. Various kinds of those object-***dhammas*** benefit  that  that  ***dhammas***  of  mind  and  mental  concomitants  by  relation,  of  object (***ārammaņa*** ***paccaya***), It means that only when the object which is to be known is present, can cognition be occurred. 

4. ***adhipati paccaya* (the relation of predominance)** 

The  ***dhamma***  which  is  capable  of  benefiting  resultant  ***dhamma***  by  means  of occurrence of chief, is called the relation of predominance ***(adhipati** **paccaya**).* The relation of predominance is of two kinds, to wit, compatible predominance (***sahajātādhipati paccaya**)* and objective predominance *(**ārammaņādhipati** **paccaya**).* There are four kinds of relations of compatible predominance furthermore. 

***\*A.  Relation of compatible predominance* (*sahjātādhipati paccaya*)** 

***chandādhipati chandasampayuttakānam dhammānam tam samuṭṭhānānañca rūpānam adhipatipaccayena paccaya. (Paṭṭhāna.1.2)*** 

- The ***dhamma*** called intention or **desire-to-do** which has arriving at the predominant 

state  *(**chandhādhipati**)*  benefits  associating  mind  and  mental  concomitants  and  CPM  by 

means of relation of predominance. 

It  should  be  recognized  on  those  four  kinds  of  ***dhammas***  called  ***chanda-vīriya-citta- vīmamsa***  (intention  or  desire-to-do,  energy  or  effort,  consciousness  or  will,  reason  or investigation)  as  relation  of  predominance.  Those  are  ***dhammas***  which  are  capable  of benefiting compatible ***dhamma** (**sahajāta** **dhamma**)* within one mind moment by means of occurrence of chief. Those four kinds are able to occur associating with each other within one mind moment. But they are unable to arrive at the predominant state simultaneously. For such time the mind occurs by means of intention or desire-to-do as chief. At that time that  intention  only  has  arrived  at  the  predominant  state,  resulting  in  belonging  to  this relation but not remaining three belong to this relation. It should be recognized on relation of predominance of effort, investigation and will similarly. Only one of those four kinds is able to perform the function of chief in one mind moment. 

1. ***chandādhipati**  \_\_\_*  When  the  mind  occurs  by  means  of  intention  as  chief,  the 

intention  (***chanda**)*  is  relation  of  predominance  while  those  consciousness  of impulsions  associating  with  that  intention,  those  mental  concomitant  ***dhammas*** 
PAGE30

excluding  ***chanda**,  **vicikicchā**,*  and  CPM  are  resultant  ***dhammas***  called ***paccayuppanna**.* 

2. ***vīriyādhipati** -* When the mind occurs by means of effort as chief, the effort *(**vīriya**)* is relation of predominance while these consciousness of impulsions associating with that  effort,  those  mental  concomitant  ***dhammas***  excluding  ***vīriya**,  **vicikicchā**,*  and CPM are resultant ***dhammas*** called ***paccayuppanna**.* 
2. ***vīmamsādhipati** -* When the mind occurs by means of investigation *(**paññā**)* as chief, the investigating knowledge is relation of predominance while those consciousness of impulsions associating with that investigation, those mental concomitant ***dhammas*** excluding  ***paññā**,  **vicikicchā**,*  and  CPM  are  resultant  ***dhammas***  called ***paccayuppanna**.* 
2. ***cittādhipati** \_\_\_* When the mind occurs by means of consciousness or will as chief, the consciousness *(**citta**)* is relation of predominance while those associating mental concomitant ***dhammas*** excluding ***vicikicchā*** and CPM are resultant ***dhammas*** called ***paccayuppanna**.* 

**PAGE-379** 

1. ***chandavato kim nāma na sijjhati.*** 
1. ***vīriyavato kim nāma na sijjhati.*** 
1. ***paññāvato kim nāma na sijjhati.*** 
1. ***cittavato kim nāma na sijjhati.*** 
1. For  the  person  with  intention  what  kind  of  performance  has  not  been disaccomplished yet. (It will be accomplished.) 
1. For the person with effort what kind of performance has not been disaccomplished yet. (It will be accomplished.) 
1. For  the  person  with  knowledge  what  kind  of  performance  has  not  been disaccomplished yet. (It will be accomplished.) 
1. For  the  person  with  strong  will  what  kind  of  performance  has  not  been disaccomplished yet. (It will be accomplished.) 

**B.-It should be cultivated on moral conduct** 

Before  ***chandadhipati***  (predominant  intention)  occurs,  moral  conduct  must  be cultivated by reasoning that "if intention is present what kind of performance has not been disaccomplished yet. That previous cultivation of mind to be strong benefits succeeding mind by  means  of  natural  determinative  dependence  *(**pakatūpanissaya**).*  Due  to  presence  of benefiting factor in that way, when succeeding mind occurs the intention becomes chief or leader. That kind of intention which has arrived at the predominant state is designated as "***chandādhipati”**.* In the occurrence of predominant state of remaining three, effort etc, it is similar way. 

When it has attained benefiting factor by means of natural determinative dependence 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE33

those associating ***dhammas**,* the intention etc, become significance and chief in succeeding mind (= in all consciousness and mental concomitants). It has been occurred the occurrence of associating ***dhammas*** and they themselves, the intention etc, in accordance with their wishes, the intention etc. Those associating ***dhammas*** also occur in accordance with the wish of those ***dhammas**,* the intention etc. This is because it always follows to those ***dhammas**,* the intention etc, by means of occurrence of inferiority *(**hīna**)* indeed. 

Among those four kinds of relations of predominance, ***chanda**, **vīriya**, **vīmamsa**, **citta**,* if  any  one ***dhamma***  is inferior,  those  associating ***dhammas***  are  also  inferior.  If  any  one ***dhamma*** is middle, those associating ***dhammas*** are also middle ones. If any one ***dhamma*** is superior, those associating ***dhammas*** are also superior ones, accordingly. It has, therefore, been  said  that  associating  ***dhammas***  always  follows  those  predominant  ***dhammas**,*  the intention etc. 

Due to cause to occur associating ***dhammas*** in accordance with their wishes, due to occurrence of associating ***dhammas*** with regarding to their wishes, those intention, effort, investigation,  and  consciousness  *(**chanda**,  **vīriya**,  **vīmamsa**,  **citta**),*  are  relations  of predominance. Thus it must be recognized definitely. *(**Mūlaṭī.3.169**)* 

**PAGE-380 C. Exhortation** 

In order to attain ***nibbāna**,* the ***meditator*** must, therefore, be cultivate 

1. very strong element of desire-to-do, 
1. very strong element of effort, 
1. very strong element of investigating knowledge, 
1. very strong element of consciousness. 

These  groups  of  ***dhammas***  called  ***chanda-vīriya-vīmamsa-citta***  will  lead  the continuum of mind of  ***meditator*** to ***nibbāna*** certainly. This is because those ***dhammas*** have great efficiency to occur the continuum of mind with regarding to their wishes indeed. 

**D. Relation of objective predominance** (***ārammaņadhipati paccaya)*** 

***yam yam dhammam garum katvā ye ye dhammā uppajjanti cittacetasikā dhammā, te te dhammā tesam tesam dhammānam adhipatipaccayenapaccayo. (Paṭṭhāna.1.2)*** 

With  regarding  to  such  such  objective  ***dhammas**,*  such  such  nature  of  ***dhammas*** which  are  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  occur.  That  that  objective  ***dhammas*** benefit  that  that  ***dhammas***  called  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  by  means  of relation of objective predominance *(**ārammaņa** **paccaya**). **(Paṭṭhāna.1.2)*** 

With regarding to such object *(**ārammaņa**),* mental ***dhammas*** arise. That object to 
PAGE32

which  regarded  by  mental  ***dhammas***  is  the  relation  of  objective  predominance ***(ārammaņādhipati paccaya)*** of those mental _**dhammas**. (**Abhi.A.3.345;**_ **Vs.2.165**) 

The object which deserves to respect is capable of benefiting the consciousness, which bends to that object, which leads to that object, which regards to that object, which is the cause of reasoning; the consciousness which is capable of pleasing; and those consciousness of Path and Fruit accordingly. It should be recognized on occurrence of capable of benefiting of the object as the lord and master of resultant ***dhammas**,* mind and mental concomitants which are related to it, is the relation of objective predominance due to presence of efficiency to benefit properly on those consciousness which are bending toward it. *(**Mūlaṭī**.**3.169**)* 

***Paccaya dhamma* (causal *dhammas)\_\_\_*** (18) kinds of real corporealities which are most regardful; (84) kinds of consciousness excluding (2)kinds of consciousness rooted in hate, (2) kinds of consciousness rooted in delusion, touching-consciousness with disagreeable feeling; (47) kinds of mental concomitants, excluding hate *(**dosa**),* envy *(**issā**),* stinginess *(**macchariya**),*  remorse  *(**kukkucca**),*  scepsis  *(**vicikicchā**);*  and  ***nibbāna***  are  relation  of objective predominance *(**ārammaņādhipati** **paccaya**).* (For a ***meditator*** who wants to discern as ***vipassanā***  object,  these ***dhammas**,*  (18)  kinds  of  real  corporealities;  groups  of  mental ***dhammas*** occurring in six kinds of cognitive processes, which are arising by taking six kinds of  objects,  which  are  including  impulsions  of  unwholesome  deeds  rooted  in  greed  and impulsions of great wholesome deeds, excluding touching-consciousness with disagreeable feeling; groups of mental ***dhammas*** of first, second, third and fourth absorptions, which are arising by taking the object of sign of full concentration of ***ānāpāna**,* are relation of objective predominance.) 

**PAGE-381** 

__*Paccayuppanna dhamma* (resultant *dhammas)*__ *-* (8) kinds of impulsions rooted in hate, which are most regardful; (8) kinds of impulsions of great wholesome deeds; (4) kinds of impulsions of great indifference with knowledge *(__ñāņa sampayutta mahākiriya javana__);* 

(8)  kinds  of  supr***a-***mundane  consciousness;  (45)  kinds  of  mental  concomitants  excluding hate,  envy,  stinginess,  remorse,  scepsis,  two  boundless  states  *(**appamaññā**)*  are  resultant ***dhamma**  (**paccayuppanna**  **dhamma**)*  of  ***ārammaņādhipati**  **paccaya**.*  (For  a  ***meditator*** especially\_\_\_\_  groups  of  mental ***dhammas***  occurring  in  impulsions  rooted  in  greed;  and groups.rnental ***dhammas*** occurring in impulsions of great wholesome deeds excluding two boundless states, are resultant ***dhammas*** of ***ārammaņādhipati** **paccaya**)* 

This is a kind of relation in which mentality and corporeality are capable of benefiting mentality and corporeality indeed. 

These causal ***dhammas*** occur for both three periods *(**kāla**)* and free from time *(**kāla*** 

***vimutta**).* 

5. ***anantara paccaya* (the relation of contiguity) \_\_\_ *samanantara paccaya* (the relation of immediate contiguity)** 

Due  to  absence  of  interruption  of  any  ***dhamma***  which  is  capable  of  separating between causal ***dhamma*** and resultant ***dhamma**,* the ***dhamma*** which is capable of making qualities of resultant ***dhamma*** by means **of** occurrence of contiguity, is called the **relation of contiguity *(anantara paccaya).*** 

Due  to  absence  of  interruption  of  any  ***dhamma***  which  is  capable  of  immediate 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE35

separating between causal ***dhamma*** and resultant ***dhamma**,* the ***dhamma*** which is capable of making qualities of resultant ***dhamma*** by means of immediate occurrence of contiguity, is called the __relation of immediate contiguity *(samanantara paccaya*__*).* 

***\* A*. The essence to be recognized** 

The  mind-element  (***mano**  **dhātu**)*  called  receiving  *(**sampaṭicchana**)*  arises  contiguously adjacent to the seeing-consciousness (***cakkhu** **viññāņa**);* the mind cognition-element *(**mano** **viññāņa** **dhātu**)* called investigating *(**santīraņa**)* arises contiguously adjacent to the mind- element  called  receiving;  The  mind  cognition-element  called  determining  *(**vuṭṭho**)*  arises contiguously  adjacent  to  the  mind  cognition-element  called  investigating.  The process  of NONE (newly occurrence of next existence) called ***paṭisandhi*** arises contiguously adjacent to the death-consciousness *(**cuti**). -* Thus such such consciousness arises contiguously adjacent to such such consciousness. The nature of contiguous occurrence of that that consciousness adjacent to preceding ones is fixed law of cognitive process *(**citta niyama**)* indeed. 

The nature of fixed law of cognitive process is achieved by the efficacy of preceding 

consciousness, which is made specially by causal ***dhammas**,* object etc, which are capable of making the occurrence of various resultant ***dhamma*** simultaneously. It is not achieved by efficacy of any other ***dhamma*** but by efficacy **of** preceding consciousness only. Therefore the nature  of  ***dhamma**,*  which  is  capable  of  occurring  proper  consciousness  and  mental concomitants contiguously just after itself perished away, is called the relation of contiguity *(**anantara paccaya**).* Therefore the Buddha preached that \_\_\_\_ 

***anantarapaccayoti  cakkhuviññāņadhātu  tam  sampayuttakā  ca  dhammā manodhātuyā  tam  sampayuttakānañca  dhammānam  anantarapaccayenapaccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-l-2)*** 

- "Both  seeing-consciousness  element  and  associating  ***dhammas***  of  that  seeing-

consciousness  element  benefit  the  mind-element  called  receiving  (***sampaṭicchana**)*  and associating  ***dhammas***  of  that  mind-element  called  receiving  by  means  of  the  relation  of contiguity *(**anantara** **paccaya**)",* preached by the Buddha. (***Paṭṭhāna-1-1**)* 

**PAGE-382** 

That ***dhamma*** called ***anantara** **paccaya*** is also known as ***samanantara** **paccaya**.* It is right.\_\_\_\_\_  These  two  relations,  contiguity  and  immediate  contiguity  called  ***anantara** **paccaya*** and ***samanantara** **paccaya*** are different only in grammatical usage but similar in meaning  as  some  words,  ***upacaya***  and  ***santati,  adhivacana  duka***  and  ***nirutti  duka**,*  etc. _(**Abhi.A.3.346;**_ **Vs.2.166**) 

2. **Special cause and traditional cause** 

With regarding to above phrase\_\_\_\_ “which is made specially by causal ***dhammas**,* object  etc,  which  are  capable  of  making  the  occurrence  of  various  resultant ***dhamma**"  -* means that for those two kinds seeing-consciousness, wholesome resultant and unwholesome resultant  seeing-consciousness,  in  order  to  occur  the  former  one  desirable  object *(**iṭṭhārammaņa**)* is special cause while the light and attention *(**manasīkāra**)* are traditional 
PAGE34

causes which concern with both kinds of wholesome resultant and unwholesome resultant seeing-consciousness *(**sādhāraņa** **paccaya**).* In order to occur unwholesome resultant seeing- consciousness  undesirable  object  *(**aniṭṭhārammaņa**)*  is  special  cause  while  the  light  and attention  are  traditional  causes.  It  should  be  recognized  similarly  for  the  receiving (***sampaṭicchana**)* and investigating *(**santīraņa**).* 

3. **Different opinions** 

**"Due to** absence of separable ***dhamma*** called ultimate nature, it is designated as the relation of contiguity *(**anantara** **paccaya**).* Due to absence of separable ***dhamma*** called time, it is designated as the relation of immediate contiguity *(**samanantara** **paccaya**)" -* interpreted by  some  teachers  called  *Revata*  school  of  thought.  That  opinion  is  contradictory  to  the following preaching etc. 

***nirodhā  vuṭṭhahantassa  nevasaññānāsaññāyatanakusalam  phalasamāpattiyā samanantarapaccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-*1-138)** 

Those *Revata* schools of thought accepted the difference between two relations that due to absence of separable ***dhamma*** called ultimate nature, it is designated as ***anantara** **paccaya*** while due to absence of separable ***dhamma*** called time (= due to absence of extra time  between  perishing  stage  *(**bhavańga**)*  of  preceding  consciousness  and  arising  stage *(**uppāda**)* of succeeding consciousness), it is designated as ***samanantara** **paccaya**.* 

Before  the  cessation  absorption  *(**nirodha**  **samāpatti**)*  is  entered  the  Non-returner *(**anāgāmī**)*  discerns  orderly  on  mundane  absorptions *(**lokiya** **samāpatti**)*  as  the  objects  of ***vipassanā*** practice by means of ***yuganaddha*** method. (= In this method ***samatha*** practice and ***vipassanā*** practice are yoking together.) Before the cessation absorption is entered he enters into  the  absorption  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  *(**ne'va-saññā-nā- saññāyatanajhāna**).*  After  one  or  two  times  of  impulsions  of  absorption  of  neither- perception-nor-non-perception, he reaches into the cessation absorption. After he enters into the cessation absorption for a moment or a few days or up to seven days, when he emerges from that cessation absorption, single consciousness of the third fruition-absorption *(**anāgāmi phala  samāpatti**)*  occurs  in  him.  That  wholesome  impulsion  of  absorption  of  neither- perception-nor-non-perception benefits single impulsion of the third fruition absorption by relation of contiguity (***anantara** **paccaya**).* "Due to this reason this opinion of *Revata* school of thought that - "due to absence of separable ***dhamma*** called time, it is designated as the relation of immediate contiguity", is opposite to above quotation of *Pd\i* Text resulting in rejection on this opinion", meant by the commentator. Then this opinion of *Revata* school of thought is also contradictory to these ***Pāli*** Texts showing the facts that - before the arahant enters  into  cessation-absorption  the  last  indifferent  impulsion  of  absorption  of  neither- perception-nor-non-perception  occurs  and  it  benefits  the  single  consciousness  of  fourth fruition-absorption *(**arahatta phala samāpatti** **citta**)* which is the first one after emerging from cessation-absorption and then before a person reaches into the realm of mindless being *(**a-saññasatta bhūmi**),* the death consciousness of sensuous sphere occurs and it benefits the consciousness of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* of sensuous sphere again, which is separated by five hundred worlds time (***kappa**)* as the existence of mindless being. _(**Abhi.A.3.346;**_** 

**Vs.2.166**) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE37

**PAGE-383** 

*(*There is no separate ***Pāli*** Text showing how death consciousness of sensuous sphere benefits the NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* of sensuous sphere which is separated with one existence of mindless being.  It  belongs  to  ***Pāli***  Text,  ***"purimā  purimā  abyākatā  dhammā  pacchimānam pacchimānam  abyākatānam  dhammānam  samanantara  paccayena  paccayo"'. (Paṭṭhāna.1.4))*** 

When the wholesome deed of neither-perception-nor-non-perception which occurred before cessation-" absorption was entered for the Noble One who emerged from cessation- absorption, benefit the fruition-absorption by means of relation of immediate contiguity, the efficacy of the former  never diminishes although the impulsion of absorption of neither- perception-nor-non-perception  is  unable  to  benefit  immediately  the  fruition-absorption. Those  teachers  assumed  that  due  to  presence  of  prohibition  of  efficacy  of  cessation absorption,  during  entering  into  cessation-absorption,  it  is  separated  without  occurring fruition-absorption so that relation of immediate contiguity can be occurred. If the words of those teachers are inferred, their words finish saying lack of no separation of time (= finish to say separation of time is present). It is right. — When it is emerged from cessation-absorption and  the  wholesome  deed  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  benefits  the  fruition- absorption of the occurrence, “absence of separable ***dhamma*** called time", never presents. There is separable ***dhamma*** called time really. Our suggestion (= commentator's suggestion) also means separable ***dhamma*** called time is present. 

Due to presence of separable ***dhamma*** called time in that way, that suggestion of *Revata* school of thought, "due to absence of separable ***dhamma*** called time, it is designated as the relation of immediate contiguity *(**samanantara** **paccaya**)"* is unacceptable and not proper  one.  According  to  interpretation  of  those  teachers,  the  impulsion  of  absorption ofneither-perception-nor-non-perception is unable to benefit impulsion of fruition-absorption which occurs during emerging from cessation-absorptions, by means of relation of immediate contiguity.  Therefore,  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  these  two  kinds  of  relations, ***anantara** **paccaya*** and ***samanantara** **paccaya*** are different in only terminology but the same in meaning, and it should not be further taken into heart the fact that "due to absence of separable ***dhamma*** called ultimate nature (= due to ***atthānantara**)* the relation of contiguity occurs; due to absence of separable ***dhamma*** called time (= due to ***kālānantara**),* the relation of immediate contiguity occurs," etc. 

**Due**  to  absence  of  any  kind  of  separable  ***dhamma***  between  causal  ***dhamma***  and resultant ***dhamma**,* those causalities are designated as ***anantara**.* Due to absence of any kind of form or shape and immediate separable ***dhamma*** between causal ***dhamma*** and resultant ***dhammas**,* those causalities are designated as ***samanantara**.* 

__Causal *dhammas*__ *—* All kinds of preceding consciousness and mental concomitants, excluding death-consciousness of arahant, are called *__anantara__ __paccaya__* and *__samanantara__* 

***paccaya**.* **PAGE-384** 

__Resultant  *dhammas*__  *—*  All  kinds  of  succeeding  consciousness  and  mental concomitants  including  death-consciousness  of  arahant  are  called  resultant  *__dhamma__ (__paccayuppanna__  __dhamma__).*  These  are  kinds  of  relations  in  which  mentality  benefits mentality, indeed. 
PAGE36

4. **Summary** 

***yesam  yesam  dhammānam  anantarā  ye  ye  dhammā  uppajjanti  citta cetasikādhammā,  te  te  dhammā  tesam  tesam  dhammānam  anantarapaccayenapaccayo. samanantara paccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna.1.3,4)*** 

Just  after  such  such  preceding  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants  excluding death-consciousness  of  arahant,  such  such  succeeding  consciousness  and  mental concomitants,  including  death-consciousness  of  arahant  arise  contiguously.  That  that preceding consciousness and mental concomitants, excluding death consciousness of arahant, benefit  that  succeeding  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants,  including  death- consciousness of arahant by means of both relations of contiguity and immediate contiguity ***(anantara paccaya, samananlara paccaya). (Paṭṭhāna-1-3,4)*** 

Preceding  consciousness  perishes  away  after  benefiting  for  arising  of  succeeding consciousness. It must be discerned in order to see this nature by penetrative knowledge. 

5. **Cessation-absorption *(nirodha samāpatti)* and mindless being *(a-saññasatta)* (opinion of *Mūlaṭīkā)*** 

In the commentary — it is suggested that — "there is separated by time between the last mental ***dhamma*** (= impulsion of absorption of neither-perception-nor-non-perception), before  cessation-absorption  occurs,  and  the  first  mental  ***dhamma**  (=*  impulsion  of  the fruition-absorption of Non-returner or Arahant)" after emerging from cessation-absorption and  it  explained  that  the  opinion  of  *Revata*  school  of  thought,  i.e.,  ***kālāntaratāya** **samanantara**  **paccayo**  =*  due  to  absence  of  separation  of  time,  it  is  designated  as ***samanantara** **paccaya**",* is unacceptable and not proper one. Because ***Mūlaṭīkā*** Sayadaw has no satisfaction on that explanation, he further expounded as *"**dhammānam** **pavattimeva ca upādāya**" (**Mūlaṭīkā-3-170**)* etc. The meaning of that ***Mūlaṭīkā*** is as follows: \_\_\_\_ 

Time  *(**kāla**)*  is  a  terminological  usage  that  should  be  called  depending  upon occurrence of ***dhammas***  indeed. It should be recognized that "there is no separation of time while cessation-absorption is being entered and mindless being is occurring due to absence of occurrence of mental ***dhamma**.* Therefore it should be recognized the fact that "there is no separation of time between previous impulsion of absorption of neither-perception-nor- non-perception of Non-retumer or Arahant who entered into cessation-absorption, and the impulsion of Fruition-absorption after emerging from cessation-absorption; or there is no separation of time between death consciousness of previous existence before occurrence of mindless being eccws  and the process of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* of sensuous sphere after death of mindless being, due to absence of any separation between cessation and arising. 

*(*Due to absence of mental ***dhamma*** totally between the last impulsion of absorption of neither-perception-nor-non-perception before cessation-absorption is entered and the first impulsion of fruition-absorption of Non-retumer or Arahant after emerging from cessation- absorption, there is no separation of time. Due to absence of mental ***dhamma*** totally between death  consciousness  of  sensuous  sphere  or  fine  material  sphere  beforen  occurrence  of mindless being and the process of NONE of sensuous sphere after death of mindless being, during which exists 500 worlds times *(**kappa**)* as mindless being, there is no separation of time. Time *(**kāla**)* is a terminological usage that should be called depending upon occurrence of ***dhammas**.* During cessation absorption is entering or during occurring mindless being, there is no occurrence of mental ***dhamma**,* resulting in "no interval of time". It should be recognized in this way.*)* 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE39

**PAGE-385** 

It is right. \_\_\_\_\_ It should be said that the occurrence of time interval is present depending  on  such  occurrence  of  mental  ***dhamma***  between  preceding  impulsion  of absorption  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  and  succeeding  impulsion  of  fruition absorption  of  Non-returner  or  Arahant  for  the  person  who  emerges  from  cessation- absorption; between  death  consciousness  of previous  existence  and process  of NONE  of sensuous sphere for the person who is deceased from realm of mindless being. But there is no mental ***dhamma*** in that way. 

Then the occurrence of corporeal ***dhamma*** is unable to separate between two kinds of occurrence of mental ***dhammas**.* Why is it? \_\_\_\_\_ It is because the continuum of corporeal ***dhammas*  has**  specific  nature  from  that  of  mental  ***dhamma***  indeed.  Due  to  presence  of specific nature of two kinds of continuum of corporeal and mental ***dhammas**,* corporeality and mentality are different from each other although they are able to occur as compatibility. 

Again the ***dhamma*** which occurs in the middle of previous and later ***dhammas*** of any kind of continuum of corporealities or mentalities is able to separate those previous and later ***dhammas*** due to it concerns with that continuum. Any kind of ***dhamma**,* which is capable of making separation, which is concerning with that continuum of mentalities, is absent between previous impulsion of absorption of neither-perception-nor-non-perception before entering into  cessation-absorption  and  later  impulsion  of  fruition  absorption  of  Non-returner  or Arahant after emerged from cessation-absorption. 

Further more ***a-bhāvapaññatti*** called emptiness is unable to separate because it is apparently absent in the aspect of ultimate sense. Due to absence of ***a-bhāvapaññatti*** (= emptiness) in the aspect of ultimate sense and due to occurrence of inseparable one, the contiguous occurrence and immediate contiguous occurrence of succeeding impulsion or life- continuum arises adjacent to preceding impulsion or life-continuum *(**bhavanga**).* Therefore it should be, recognized the fact that previous impulsion of absorption of neither-perception- nor-non-perception  before  occurrence  of  cessation'-absorption,  and  previous  death- consciousness before occurrence of mindless being are capable of making resultant ***dhammas*** called impulsion of fruition-absorption of Non-returner (or Arahant), and process of NONE of sensuous sphere (for deceased person from mindless realm) by means of occurrence of contiguity. 

**PAGE-386** 

Especially — in the explanation on the way how these ***anantara** **paccaya*** and ***samanantara** **paccaya*** benefit, the occurrence of efficacy of ***anantara** **paccaya*** and ***samanantara** **paccaya*** is obvious. Therefore the commentator should explain only the occurrence of efficacy of those relations for the arising of resultant ***dhammas**.* Although it should be explained in that way, due to occurrence of concerning between anterior limitation called the arising stage *(**uppāda**)* and posterior limitation called the perishing stage *(**bhańga**),* the Buddha preached on those present ***dhammas** (**paccuppanna** **dhamma**),* which are belonging to three times phases  called  arising-static-perishing  phases  *(**uppāda**,  **ṭhiti**,  **bhańga**),*  which  can  not  be designated as the __arising *dhamma*__ *(__uppajjati__),* as follows: \_\_\_\_ 

***alīto  dhammo  paccuppannassa  dhamassa  anantara  paccayenapaccayo. (Paṭṭhāna.l.413)*** 

- "Previously occurred ***dhamma*** benefits present occurring ***dhamma*** by means of the 

relation of contiguity" etc, preached by the Buddha. It should, therefore, be recognized the 
PAGE38

fact that the Buddha did not preached on those relations,**   ***paccaya**.* etc*,* in order to refer just arising stage *(**uppāda**)* only but to refer both three-times-phases, arising phase, static phase, perishing phase. 

It is right. — As the term, ***kusala** (=* wholesome) is not demarcated by time in such way that "present ***kusala**,* past ***kusala**,* future ***kusala*** etc", the term, ***paccuppanna** (=* present) is not a grammatical usage lacking demarcation with time. But it is a kind of grammatical usage  with  time  demarcation.  Because  the  term,  ***kusala**,*  is  not  demarcated  by  means  of arising  demarcation  called,  anterior  extremity  and  perishing  demarcation  called  posterior extremity, those ***dhamma*** with the arising phase only can be interpreted. However, the term, ***paccuppanna***  is  not  grammatical  usage  without  demarcation  by  time.  Because  the  term, ***paccuppanna*** is interpreted by demarcation with time called ***uppāda**-**ṭhiti**-**bhańga*** (= arising phase, static phase, perishing phase), there is no turn *(**vāra**), **paṭiccavāra*** etc, in the past triad (***atīta tika**). (**Mūlaṭī.3.***170**)                      

For these relations, ***anantara** **paccaya*** and ***samanantara** **paccaya**,* causal ***dhammas*** are consciousness and mental concomitants which were just occurred in past mind moment, while  resultant  *(**paccayuppanna**)  **dhammas***  are  consciousness  and  mental  concomitants which are reaching in three-times-phases *(**khaņattaya**)* called ***uppāda**-**ṭhiti**-**bhańga**.* Among three kinds of present *(**paccupanna**), **addhā*** present, ***santati*** present, ***khaņa*** present, if it is designated  by  ***khaņa***  present,  (=*  momentary  present),  causal  ***dhamma***  is  the  past  while resultant ***dhamma*** is the present. It is a kind of relation in which mentality benefit mentality indeed. Those consciousness of process of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**),* life-continuum *(**bhavanga**),* and  death-consciousness,  which  are  free  from  cognitive  process,  excluding  death- consciousness of Arahant, belong to these relations. 

6. ***sahajāta paccaya* (the relation of compatibility)** 

The causal ***dhamma*** which is capable of benefiting resultant ***dhamma*** in order to occur compatibly at the arising *(**uppāda**)* stage of itself is called the relation of compatibility ***(sahajāta paccaya).*** It should be recognized as fire of oil-lamp benefits the light. 

As the fire of oil-lamp benefits both the arising of light and maintaining of light simultaneously  as  soon  as  it  is  burned  —  similarly,  those  ultimate  ***dhammas***  which  are compatible  occurring  within  three-times-phases  called  ***uppāda**-**ṭhiti**-**bhańga***  benefits  each other in order to occur resultant ***dhamma*** as soon as oneself arises and in order to stand resultant ***dhamma*** in static stage as soon as itself stands, are designated as the relation of compatibility ***(sahajāta paccaya).*** 

**PAGE-387 A. Six kinds of *sahajāta paccaya*** 

1. ***cattāro khandhā arupino aññamaññam sahajātapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***cattāro mahābhūtā aññamaññam sahajātapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***okkantikkhane nāmarūpam aññamaññam sahajātapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***cittacetasikā dhammā cittasamuṭṭhānānam rūpānam sahajātapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***mahābhūtā upādārūpānam sahajātapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***rūpino  dhammā  arūpīnam  dhammānam  kiñcikāle  sahajātapaccayena  paccayo. kiñcikāle na sahajātapaccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna.* 1.5)** 

***aññamaññamti  añño  aññassa.  iminā  etesam  dhammānam  ekakkhaņe paccayabhāvañceva paccayuppannabhāvañca dīpeti. (Abhi.A.3.365)*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE41

1. Four kinds of mental aggregates within one mind moment benefit **each other by the relation of** compatibility (***sahajāta** **paccaya**).* 
1. By  the  time  three-times-phases  of  corporeality  called  ***uppāda**,  **ṭhiti**,  **bhahga**,*  are occurring, four great elements benefit each other; three kinds benefit one kind; one kind benefits three kinds; two kinds benefit two kinds by means of the relation of compatibility. 
1. By  the  time  the  process  of  NONE  *(**paṭisandhi**)*  of  five-groups-existence *(**pañcavokāra**),* mentality and corporeality benefit each other by means of the relation of compatibility. 
1. All kinds of consciousness and mental concomitants, excluding (10) kinds of two- fivefold consciousness *(**dvepañcaviññāņa**),* (4) kinds of resultant consciousness of immaterial  sphere  *(**arūpa**  **vipāka**),*  death-consciousness  of  Arahant,  benefit corporealities  produced  by  mind  (CPM)  (in  the  method  of  commentary),  those consciousness and mentalities benefit CPM and corpoealities produced by ***kamma*** (CPK) of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* (in the method of teacher), by means of relation of compatibility. 
1. Great elements benefit derived corporealities of same corporeal unit by means of the relation of compatibility. 
1. By  the  time  the  process  of  NONE  of  five-group-existence  occurs,  heart-base corporealities *(**hadaya** **vatthu** **rūpa**)* benefit four mental aggregates by means of the relation  of  compatibility.  But  it  can  not  benefit  four  mental  aggregates  during remaining life *(**pavatti**).* 

` `*(*Notes:  —  Due  to  simultaneous  occurrence  of  depended  heart-base  and  mental ***dhammas*** of NONE at the time of NONE, depended heart base benefit mental ***dhammas*** of NONE by the relation of compatibility. During the life, however, mental ***dhammas*** arise depending upon heart-base which occurred previous one mind moment resulting in inability to benefit by means of the relation of compatibility.*)* 

***cittacetasikāti pavattiyam cattāro khandhā. (Abhi-A-3-365)*** 

In the commentary it is explained that in number 4, all kinds of consciousness and mental concomitants must be interpreted on those consciousness and mental concomitants occurring during life. The interpreter Sayadaw, however, expounded that mental ***dhammas*** of NONE  are also involved in this relation  according to ***ācariyavāda*** (= teachers school of thought). It can be suggested that the commentary did not explained on it because it has already presented in number 3, *"**okkantikkhaņe** **nāmarūpam**".* 

**PAGE-388** 

***okkantikkhaņeti  pañcavokārabhave  paṭisandhikkhaņe.  tasmimñhi  khaņe nāmarūpam  okkantam  viya  pakkhandantam  viya  paralokato  imam  lokam  āgantvā pavisantam viya uppajjati, tasmā so khaņo “okkantikkhaņoti" vuccati. (Abhi.A.3.365)*** 

- ***okkantikkhaņa*** means the moment of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* in the realm of five-

groups-existence. At that moment of NONE, mentality and corporeality occur as either the person who comes from previous existence to recent existence entering into the womb of the mother or the person who will has process of birth out of foam *(**sansedaja**)* or apparitional rebirth  *(**opapātika**),*  enter  respective  site.  Therefore  that  moment  of  process  of  NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* is designated as ***okkantikkhaņa. (Abhi.A.3.365)*** 

7. ***aññamañña paccaya* (the relation of mutuality)** 
PAGE40

The ***dhamma*** which is capable of benefiting of each other by means of mutually cause to occur and support is called the relation of mutuality *(**aññamañña** **paccaya**).* It should be recognized as tripods which are able to support mutually. ***(Abhi.A.3.34'7;* Vs.2.167)** 

As three legs of an adjustable three-legged stand can support each other not to fall down, similarly causal and resultant ***dhammas*** can be varied but both kinds can support reciprocally and this ability to occur and support is designated as the relation of mutuality *(**aññamañña** **paccaya**).* 

In  the  explanation  of  ***sahajāta**  **paccaya***  it  shows  that  ***uppajjamānova  saha uppādanabhāvena upakārako dhammo.** **(Abhi-A-3-346; Vs.2-166)*** = the causal ***dhamma*** which is capable of benefiting resultant ***dhamma*** in order to occur compatibly at the arising *(**uppāda**)* stage of itself, is called the relation of compatibility *(**sahajāta** **paccaya**).* Those words were said because the way of benefiting to occur is obviously apparent. It should be recognized the fact that according to ***nidassana naya*** (= the method showing obvious or easy one) that words also refer "the way of benefiting to stand". (***Mahāṭī-2-274-para-599***) 

In this ***aññamañña** **paccaya**,* it shows that _**aññamaññam uppādanupatthambhana- bhāvena  upakārako  dhammo.**  **(Abhi-A-3-347;  Vs.2-167)**_  _**ayañca  uppattiyā  ṭhitiyā  ca upakārakoti veditabbo.** (**Mahāaṭī-2-275**)._ "This _**aññamañña** **paccaya**_ is the **_dhamma_** which is capable of benefiting by means of the cause to occur and support mutually. This kind of relation benefits each other in order to arise and stand", explained in this way. 

Therefore  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  these  ***sahajāta**  **paccaya***  and ***aññamañña** **paccaya*** benefit resultant ***dhammas*** in order to arise and stand. 

**PAGE-389** 

1. **Three kinds** __of *aññamañña*__ __*paccaya*__ 
1. ***cattāro khandhā arūpino aññamaññapaccayenapaccayo.*** 
1. ***cattāro mahdbhūtā aññamaññapaccayenapaccayo.*** 
1. ***okkantikkhaņe nāmarūpam aññamaññapaccayenapaccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-1-5)*** 
1. Four kinds of mental aggregates benefit each other mutually, by means of the relation of mutuality. 
1. Four kinds of great elements benefit each other mutually, by means of the relation of mutuality. 
1. Mentality and corporeality benefit each other mutually at the moment of process of NONE of five-groups-existence *(**pañcavokāra** **bhava**)* by means of the relation of mutuality. 
2. **Interpretation of causal and resultant *dhamma*** 

**(i) Among mental aggregates** 

1. each  one  kind  of  mental  aggregates,  as  causal  ***dhamma**,*  which  is  capable  of benefiting on the remaining three kinds respectively, 
1. each two kinds of mental aggregates, as causal ***dhammas**,* which are capable of benefiting on the remaining two kinds, respectively. 
1. each three kinds of mental aggregates, as causal ***dhamma**,* which are capable of benefiting on the remaining one kind respectively. 

In this way it must be divided into three groups of causal and resultant ***dhammas*** among mental aggregates. According to this way of grouping method, it has been explained in discerning of causal relationship previously, that if one kind of mental ***dhamma*** or mental 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE43

aggregate  is  designated  as  resultant ***dhamma**,*  the  remaining  mental ***dhammas***  or  mental aggregates are designated as causal ***dhamma*** etc. 

` `**(ii) Among four great elements** 

1. each one kind of great elements, as causal ***dhamma**,* which is capable of benefiting on the remaining three kinds respectively. 
1. each  two  kinds  of  great  elements,  as  causal  ***dhammas**,*  which  are  capable  of benefiting on the remaining two kinds, respectively. 
1. each  three  kinds  of  great  elements,  as  causal  ***dhammas**,*  which  are  capable  of benefiting on the remaining one kind, respectively. 

In this way it must be divided into three groups of causal and resultant ***dhamma*** among four great elements. Those explanations, which will be presented in coming Volume IV, Section 7, ***lakkhaņādi catukka**,* that ***avasesa dhātuttaya padaṭṭhāna =*** "the proximate cause of each element is the remaining three elements" ***(Vs.2-73)***, etc, are in accordance with this ***Pāli*** Text. 

These ways of interpretation of causal and resultant ***dhammas*** among mental aggregates and great elements are concerned with both two relations of compatibility and mutuality. Because these relations of compatibility and mutuality are ***dhammas*** which are capable of benefiting mental or corporeal ***dhammas*** of within one mind moment or one corporeal unit, both causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are present ***dhammas*** occurring in the moment of three- times-phases called ***uppāda**, **ṭhiti**, **bhańga**,* (= ***khaņattayasamańgī**).* Those are - relations *(**paccaya**)* in which mentality and corporeality benefit mentality and corporeality. 

**PAGE-390** 

8. ***nissaya paccaya* (the relation of dependence)** 

As the earth is standing place and dependence of tree, as the canvas is standing place and  dependence  **of  oil**  painting  etc,  similarly  -  the  causal  ***dhamma***  which  is  capable  of benefiting by nature of occurrence **of** standing place and dependence, is called the **relation of dependence *(nissaya paccaya).*** 

Those are of two kinds, viz., (1) compatible dependence *(**sahajāta** **nissaya**)* and (2) pre-compatible dependence *(**purajāta** **nissaya**).* 

1) ***sahajāta nissaya paccaya* (the relation of compatible dependence)** 

Those  causal  ***dhammas**,*  aggregates  *(**khandhā**)*  etc,  benefit  various  ***dhammas**,* aggregates etc, which occur depending upon them by means of occurrence of dependence. For instance\_\_\_\_ It is similar to a canvas, stretched taut over a frame which is dependence of painting. These causal and resultant ***dhammas*** concerning in this relations* are the same as those kinds concerning in the relation presented in ***sahajāta** **paccaya**,* from number 1 to 5. Instead of number 6 causal and resultant ***dhamma* of** ***sahajāta** **paccaya**,* it is preached on the following relation of pre-compatible dependence *(**purajāta** **nissaya** **paccaya**). (**Mūlaṭī**-**3-171**)* 

2) ***purajāta nissaya paccaya* (the relation of precompatible dependence)** 

The earth-element *(**pathavī** **dhātu**)* benefits the remaining three great elements and eye-clear-sensitivity  etc,  benefit  seeing-consciousness-element  etc,  by  means  of  the occurrence of standing place. For instance,\_\_\_\_ It is similar to the earth which is standing place of grass, tree, etc. *(**Mūlaṭī-3-171***) Those kinds *of **purajāta** **nissaya** **paccaya*** are as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 
PAGE42

1. ***cakkhāyatanam  cakkhuviññāņadhātuyā  tam  sampayuttakānañca  dhammānam nissayapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***sottāyatanam  sotaviññāņadhātuyā  tam  sampayuttakānañca  dhammānam nissayapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***ghānāyatanam  ghānaviññāņadhātuyā  tam  sampayuttakānañca  dhammānam nissayapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***jivhāyatanam  jivhāviññāņadhātuyā  tam  sampayuttakānañca  dhammānam nissayapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***kāyāyatanam  kāyaviññāņadhātuyā  tam  sampayuttakānañca  dhammānam nissayapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***yam  rūpam  nissaya  manodhātu  ca  manoviññāņadhātu  ca  vattanti,  tarn  rūpam manodhātuyā ca manoviññāņadhātuyā ca tarn sampayuttakānañca dhammānam nissayapaccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-l-5)*** 

**By** means of occurrence of standing place, these ***dhammas**,* i.e, 

1. eye-base  *(**cakkhāyatana**)*  benefits  seeing-consciousness  element  *(**cakkhu**  **viññāņa** **dhātu**)* and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. ear-base *(**sotāyatana**)* benefits hearing-consciousness element *(**sota** **viññāņa** **dhātu**)* and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. nose-base *(**ghānāyatana**)* benefits smelling-consciousness element *(**ghāna** **viññāņa** **dhātu**)* and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. tongue-base  *(**jivhāyatana**)*  benefits  tasting-consciousness  element  *(**jivhā**  **viññāņa** **dhātu**)* and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. body-base  *(**kāyāyatana**)*  benefits  touching-consciousness  element  *(**kāya**  **viññāņa** **dhātu**)* and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. heart-base *(**hadaya** **vatthu**)* benefits mind-element *(**mano** **dhātu**),* mind-consciousness element *(**mano** **viññāņa** **dhātu**)* and associating mental ***dhammas**,* respectively, 

**PAGE-391** 

In the fifth method of ***paṭiccasamuppāda**,* the ways of discerning, "due to occurrence of heart base the feeling-aggregate  arises", "heart base is  causal ***dhamma**",* “the  feeling- aggregate is resultant ***dhamma**”,* etc are the relation of pre-compatible dependence. ***(Abhi-A- 3-347; Vs.2-167)*** 

The  term,  ***purejāta***  means  previously  occurred,  and  the  term  ***nissaya***  means dependence  ***dhamma**.\_\_\_\_*  Seeing-consciousness  and  associating  mental  ***dhammas***  arise depending  on  eye-base  (=  eye-clear-sensitivity  called  ***cakkhāyatana**)*  which  occurred previously four mind moments before they arise, i.e. which occurred simultaneously with the past  life-continuum  *(**atīta**  **bhavańga**).*  They  never  arise  depending  on  eye-base  which  is occurring simultaneously with the arising moment of themselves or those arising moments of five-doors  advertence  *(**pancadvārāvajjana**),*  cessation  of  life-continuum *(**bhavańgupaccheda**),*  shaking  of  life-continuum  *(**bhavańga**  **calana**).*  Therefore  due  to presence  of  benefiting  factor  of  eye-base  which  occurred  previously  four  mind-moments before they arise, this kind of relation is designated as ***purajāta** **nissaya**.* It means that the relation in which the causal ***dhammas*** occurred previously before resultant ***dhammas*** occur, is called ***purajāta nissaya.*** 

It  should  be  recognized  similarly  on  those  relations,  from  ear-base  to  body-base, which are dependence of hearing-consciousness-element etc, respectively. 

Mind-element, mind-consciousness-element and associating mental ***dhammas*** arise depending  upon  heart-base  which  occurred  previously  before  they  arise,  i.e.,  heart-base 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE45

which is occurring simultaneously with preceding mind, consciousness of NONE *(**paṭisandhi** **viññāņa**)* etc. Therefore it is also called ***purajāta nissaya.*** 

***adhiṭṭhānākāra**\_\_\_  **ādhārākāro  cettha  tesam  sātisayam  tadadhīnavuttitāya veditabbo. (Mahāṭī-2-276)*** 

Here, in the words\_\_ "each corporeal ***dhamma*** of base benefits respective mental ***dhammas***  by  means  of  occurrence  of  dependence"\_\_\_  the  term  ***ādhārākāra***  (=  state  of occurrence of standing place) means "the occurrence of those resultant ***dhamma*** is extremely related with those causal ***dhamma**".* 

***na  hi  yathā  vuttam  tadadhīnavuttitā  visesam  muñcitvā  añño  cakkhādīsu adesakānam arūpadhammānam adiṭṭhānākāro sambhavati. (Mahāṭī-2-276)*** 

Because the term ***āhāra*** (= standing place) is not real place on which something stand but it means "related occurrence" only, it can be said that there is no place where great elements  stand  on  what  kind  of  great  element.  In  the  words,  "seeing-consciousness  and associating mental ***dhamma*** arise depending on eye-clear-sensitivity", it does not mean that those mental ***dhamma*** stand and come in contact with eye-clear-sensitivity. It means that due to  inability  to  occur  seeing-consciousness  and  associating  ***dhamma***  without  eye-clear- sensitivity, eye-base is great dependence cause in order to arise seeing-consciousness and associating mental ***dhamma**.* It is similar meaning for mind-element, mind-consciousness- element  and  associating  mental  ***dhammas***  which  arise  depending  upon  heart-base.  It  is right.\_\_\_\_ Due to absence of location place of formless mental ***dhammas**,* there is no other location site, except "related occurrence with depended physical base". 

**PAGE-392** 

***tam  nissayatā  cassa  na  ekadesena  allīyanavasena  icchitabbā  arūpabhāvato, athakho garurājādīsu sissarājapurisādīnam viya tappaṭibaddhavuttitāya. (Anuṭī-2-56)*** 

For  example  —  In  the  words,  due  to presence  of  dependence  of  teacher,  master, parents etc, pupils, male members of the royal entourage, offspring prosper, it means that due to presence of supporting, influence, admonishment of teacher, master, parents etc, pupils etc prosper and it can be said that pupils, etc, depend on teachers etc. *(**Anuṭī-2-56**)* 

This ***nissaya** **paccaya*** is also the relation in which mentality and corporeality benefit mentality and corporeality. 

9. ***upanissaya paccaya* (the relation of determinative dependence)** 

Every  resultant  ***dhamma***  occurs  related  with  respective  causal  ***dhamma***  and  vice versa.  Therefore  every  causal ***dhamma***  which  is  deserving  to  "depend"  in  order  to  arise related  occurrence  of  respective  resultant  ***dhamma***  can  be  designated  as  dependence *(**nissaya**).* In this case, the word, "to depend", means “unforsaking of causal ***dhamma*** for respective  resultant  ***dhamma**.*  Among  those  kinds  of  causal  ***dhamma***  called  dependence *(**nissaya**),* very powerful causal ***dhamma*** is called determinative dependence *(**upanissaya**).* Therefore, it should be recognized that the ***dhamma*** which is capable of benefiting resultant ***dhamma*** by means of very powerful determinative cause, is the __relation of determinative dependence *(upanissaya paccaya).*__ __*(Abhi-A-3-347)*__ 

Those  are  of  three  kinds,  to  wit,  (1)  objective  determinative  dependence *(**ārammaņūpanissana**),* (2) contiguous determinative dependence *(**anantarūpanissayd**),* (3) natural determinative dependence ***(pakatūpanissaya)**.* 
PAGE44

1) ***ārammaņūpanissaya*** 

“After requisite that is deserving to offer, is offered, in other words, after the volition that is the cause of offering, is purified; after restrained with five moral precepts etc; those volition of donation, virtue are reflected • respectfully. Those volitions of donation, virtue that had been acquired  habits previously,  are reflected  respectfully.  After emerging from absorption, the absorption *(**jhāna**)* is reflected respectfully. Upstream-enterers *(**sotāpanna**)* reflect respectfully the cessation of mundane *(**gotrabhu**)* adjacent to the Path-Knowledge of upstream  enterer.  Once-returner  *(**sakadāgāmī**)*  and  Non-returner  *(**anagāmī**)*  reflect respectfully purity *(**vodāna**)* adjacent to the upper Path-Knowledge. Noble-Ones who has not yet attained Arahantship *(**sekkha**)* reflect respectfully the Noble Path after emerging from the Noble-Path *(**ariya magga**)"* 

In  this  way,  ***ārammaņūpanissana***  has  been  preached  previously  without differentiating from ***ārammaņādhipati**.* Among those relations, ***ārammaņādhipati paccaya*** and ***ārammaņūpanissana** **paccaya**,* by means of taking heed of such object, consciousness and mental concomitants arise. That object which is deserving to take  heed, is powerful object of those consciousness and mental concomitants. Thus due to occurrence of deserving to take heed, it is designated as the **relation of objective predominance *(ārammaņādhipati paccaya).*** Due to occurrence of powerful cause, it is designated as the **relation of objective determinative  dependence  *(ārammaņūpanissaya).***  In  this  way  it  should  be  recognized significant  characters  of  those  relations  of  objective  predominance  and  objective determinative dependence. ***(Abhi-A-3-347,* 348)** 

**PAGE-393** 

Those  examples  shown  in  above  are  showing  how  wholesome  consciousness  and mental  concomitants  arise by  taking  those  objects  which  are  deserving  to  take  heed.  By taking heed of those objects unwholesome . deed can also be occurred. 

**For example\_\_\_\_\_ A**fter donation had been made, after restraining with moral precepts, those volition of charity, virtue are strongly attached. By  means of taking heed of those volition  of  charity,  virtue,  the  lust  *(**rāga**)*  arises;  the  wrong-view  *(**diṭṭhi**)*  arises.  (=  It  is attached as mine, it is obsessed as I, my donation, my virtue etc.) By taking heed of those volition of charity, virtue that had been acquired habits previously, it is very satisfied and attached. By taking heed of that wholesome deed, the lust arises; the wrong view arises. After emerging from absorption, by taking heed of that absorption, it is very satisfied and attached. By  taking  heed  of  that  absorption,  the  lust  arises;  the  wrong  view  arises.  Preceding wholesome ***dhammas*** benefit succeeding unwholesome ***dhammas*** rooted in greed, which are predominant with lust, by means of the relation of objective determinative dependence. 

2) ***anantarūpanissaya* (contiguous determinative dependence)** 

It is similar to ***anantara** **paccaya*** in meaning. However it should be differentiated between them that due to ability to occur contiguously proper mind moment, it is designated as ***anantara** **paccaya*** and due to presence of powerful strength of preceding mind in order to occur succeeding mind, it is designated as ***anantarūpanissaya*** (the relation of contiguous determinative dependence). As the mind can arise without any kind of ***dhamma*** in some relations, ***hetu** **paccaya*** etc, there is no occurrence of succeeding mind without contiguous preceding  mind.  Therefore  preceding  mind  is  powerful  cause  for  the  occurrence  of 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE47

succeeding mind. Thus by means of ability to occur proper mind contiguously, ***anantara** **paccaya*** occurs; By means of occurrence of powerful causal ***dhamma**, **anantarūpanissaya** **paccaya*** occurs; — thus it should be recognized significant characters of those relations, ***anantara** **paccaya*** and ***anantarūpanissaya** **paccaya**. (**Abhi-A-3-348**)* 

3) ***pakatūpanissaya* (natural determinative dependence)** 

The causal ***dhamma*** which should be performed well, which is powerful dependence, is called natural determinative dependence *(**pakatūpanissana**).* The term, ***pakata*** means\_\_\_\_ both  those  causal  ***dhammas**,*  faith  *(**saddhā**),*  virtue  *(**sīla**,*  learning  *(**suta**),*  charity  *(**cāga**),* wisdom *(**paññā**)* etc, which should be acquired in the continuum of aggregates of himself and causal  ***dhammas**,*  season,  nourishment  etc,  on  which  should  be  subsisted,  are  called *"'**pakata**".* In other words, the causal ***dhamma*** which is powerful dependence naturally is - called ***pakatūpanissaya** **paccaya**.* It means that it is a kind of specific relation, different from ***ārammaņa** **paccaya*** and ***anantara** **paccaya**.* 

**PAGE-394** 

**For example** \_\_\_\_ Depending upon strong faith which has been acquired naturally in the continuum of himself donation *(**dāna**)* is performed; virtue is restrained; Sabbath *(**uposatha**)* is  observed;  absorption  *(**jhāna**)*  is  occurred;  ***vipassanā***  is  occurred;  the  Path  *(**magga**)*  is occurred; super-psychic knowledge *(**abhiññāāņa**)* is occurred; the attainment *(**samāpatti**)* is occurred. Depending upon strong virtue ... same ... the learning ... same ... the charity ... same ... the wisdom ... s ... donation is performed ... s ... the attainment is occurred. 

The faith which occurred in the preceding continuum of himself, the virtue ... s ..., the learning ... s ... the charity ... s ... the wisdom ... s ... benefit the faith which will be occurred succeedingly, the virtue ... s ... the learning ... s ... the charity ... s ... the wisdom ... s ... by means of the relation of determinative dependence *(**upanissaya** **paccaya**).* (It is the way of benefiting of wholesome deeds to wholesome deeds.) 

Furthermore,  depending  upon  the  faith  which  has  been  acquired  actively  in  the continuum of himself, the conceit *(**māna**)* arises; the wrong view *(**diṭṭhi**)* is obsessed. (= Only I have been present this kind of faith; It is the obsession that "this faith is I" etc.) Depending upon the virtue ... s ... the learning ... s ... the charity ... s ... the wisdom the conceit arises; the wrong view is obsessed. The faith which has been acquired actively in the continuum of himself, ... s ... the virtue ... s ... the learning ... s ... the charity ... s ... the wisdom ... s ... benefits the lust ... s ... the delusion ... s ... the conceit ... s ... the wrong view ... s ... the craving *(**taņhā**)* which is strongly desire to attainment of well-being *(**bhava** **sampatti**)* and prosperity  *(**bhoga  sampatti**)*  by  means  of  the  relation  of  determinative  dependence *(**upanissaya**  **paccaya**).*  (***Abhi-A-3-347,*  348,  368,  369;  Vs.2-167,168**)  (It  is  the  way  of benefiting of wholesome deeds to unwholesome deeds.) 

Furthermore, depending upon lust offering is donated, moral precepts are restrained, Sabbath  *(**uposatha**)*  (=  eight  precepts,  nine-precepts  etc)  is  observed,  the  absorption  is occurred, ***vipassanā*** is occurred, the Path *(**magga**)* is occurred, super-psychic-knowledge is occurred, the attainment *(**samapatti**)* is occurred. Depending upon the hate *(**dosa**) ...* s ... the delusion ... s ... the conceit ... s ... the wrong view ... s ... the craving, which is strongly desire to  attainment  of  well-being  and  prosperity,  benefits  the  faith  by  means  of  powerful determinative dependence, ... s ... the virtue ... s ... the learning ... s ... the charity ... s ... the wisdom by means of powerful determinative dependence _(**upanissaya** **paccaya**). **(Abhi-A-3- 369)**_** 
PAGE46

[It is the way of benefiting of unwholesome deeds to wholesome deeds, in which only the relation of natural determinative dependence *(**pakatūpanissaya** **paccaya**)* is involved, but not ***anantarūpanissaya*** and ***ārammaņūpanissaya**.* It is because the wholesome ***dhamma*** cannot be occurred by taking heed to unwholesome deeds. ***(Abhi-A-3-369)**)* 

1. **Significant notes to be recognized** 

***purimā  purimāti  anantarūpanissaye  samanantarātīta  labbhanti, ārammaņūpanissaya pkatūpanissayesu nānāvīthivasesa purimatarā.** (**Abhi-A-3-368**)* 

With  regarding  to  the  words,  ***"purimā  purimā",  (=*  "preceding  occurred *dhamma"),***  those  ***dhamma**,*  which  are  contiguously  occurred  as  in  ***anantarūpanissaya**,* should be got (= counted or concerned). Those ***dhammas**,* which are occurred many various cognitive processes beforehand, as in ***ārammaņūpanissaya**, **pakatūpanissaya**,* should be got. **(*Abhi-A-3-368*)** 

In  the  preaching  of  the  Buddha  that\_\_\_\_  ***purimā**  **purimā**  **kusalā**  **dhammā** **pacchimānam**  **pacchimānam**  **kusalānam**  **dhammānam**  **upanissaya**  **paccayena**  **paccayo**. (**Paṭṭhāna-1-5**)*  the  preceding  ***dhammas**,*  are  causal  ***dhamma***  while  succeeding  ones  are resultant  ***dhamma**.*  In  the  relation  of  contiguous  determinative  dependence,  there  is  no separation between causal and resultant ***dhammas**.* It must be interpreted on those ***dhammas*** occurring in preceding mind moments as causal ***dhammas*** while those ***dhammas*** occurring in succeeding mind moments, as resultant ***dhamma**.* 

**PAGE-395** 

In those relations of objective determinative dependence and natural determinative dependence,  however,  causal ***dhamma***  and  resultant ***dhamma***  can be  separated by  many cognitive processes. It means that those causal ***dhammas**,* the faith, virtue, learning, charity, wisdom etc, which were occurring in preceding cognitive processes, can benefit resultant ***dhammas**,* the faith, virtue, learning, charity, wisdom, etc, which are occurring in succeeding cognitive processes by means of those relations of objective determinative dependence and natural determinative dependence. 

2. **Season-nourishment-person-dwelling** 

***utubhojanampi  upanissaya paccayena  paccayo. puggalopi  upanissaya paccayena paccayo. senāsanampi upanissaya paccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-*1-6)** 

***puggalopi senāsanampīti  idam  dvayam pakatūpanissayavasena vuttam.  idañhi  dvayam  kusalākusalapavattiyā  balavapaccayohoti.  paccayabhāvo  cassa  panettha pariyāyavasena veditabboti. (Abhi-*Com-3-369,370)** 

***puggalopi  senāsanampīti  puggalasenāsanaggahanavasena  upanissayabhāvam bhajante dhamme dasseti. (Mūlaṭī-3-186)*** 

***dhammeti puggalasenāsanapaññattīnam upādānabhūte dhamme. (Anuṭī-3-253)*** 

***pi\_\_\_  saddena  cīvarāraññarukkhapabbatādiggahaņavasena  upanissayabhāvam bhajante sabbhe sańgaņhāti. (Mūlaṭī-3-186)*** 

The  season  and  nourishment  benefit  the  occurrence  of  either  wholesome  or unwholesome ***dhamma*** by means of the relation of determinative dependence. The person *(**puggala**)* and dwelling (bed and chair) also benefit the occurrence of either wholesome or unwholesome ***dhamma*** by means of the relation of determinative dependence. Among those causes,  the  season  (=  hotness  coldness)  and  nourishment  (=  nutriment)  are  ultimate ***dhammas**.* 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE49

Those two kinds, the person and dwelling are also powerful cause of occurrence of either wholesome or unwholesome ***dhammas**.* It should be recognized on the occurrence of causal ***dhammas*** of person and dwelling as this relation of natural determinative dependence by means of indirect way *(**pariyāya**).* 

**Indirect  way**  *(**pariyāya**)\_\_\_\_*  Although  the  person  and  dwelling  benefit  the occurrence of either wholesome or unwholesome ***dhamma*** by means of relation of natural determinative dependence, concept of name *(**nāma** **paññatti**)* and concept of form *(**samūha paññatti**),* called person dwelling, are unable to benefit but corporeality and mentality which are dependence of concept of name and form called person, and corporeal ***dhammas*** which are dependence of concept of name and form called dwelling, are able to benefit by means of relation of natural determinative dependence. 

**PAGE-396** 

These are ways of benefiting similar to favourable person, favourable dwelling for bodily agreeable feeling *(**kāyika sukha**)* and unfavourable person, unfavourable dwelling for bodily disagreeable feeling and mentally disagreeable feeling *(**kāyika dukkha*** and ***cetasika dukkhd**).* A virtuous friend *(**kalyāņa mitta**)* as the Buddha, benefits the occurrence of those wholesome  ***dhammas**,*  faith,  virtue,  learning,  charity,  wisdom,  etc  and  the  occurrence  of ***vipassanā*** knowledge and Path-Knowledge in the continuums of disciples. The person like Venerable ***Devadatta*** benefits the occurrence of unwholesome ***dhammas**,* killing the father *(**pitughātaka**)*  etc,  in  the  continuum  of  disciple  like  King  ***Ajāsattu**.*  These  are  kinds  of relations  of  natural  determinative  dependence  *(**pakatūpanissaya**).*  When  those  relations benefit  in  that  way,  only  corporeal  and  mental  ***dhammas***  of  ultimate  sense,  which  are designated as person, and only corporeal ***dhammas*** of ultimate sense, which are designated as dwelling, benefit the occurrence of either wholesome ***dhammas*** or unwholesome ***dhammas*** by means of relation of natural determinative dependence. 

Therefore the words, "the person benefits, the dwelling benefits", — are only the usage  of  indirect  way  *(**pariyāya**).*  It  means  that  it  is  metaphorical  usage,  called ***ṭhānayūpacāra**,* by which the term of concept of name *(**nāma** **paññatti**)* and concept of form *(**samūha** **paññatti**),* that are ***ṭhānī** (=* dweller), are applied to the usage of corporeality and mentality which are ***ṭhāna*** (= dwelling). 

With regarding to the word ***pi**,* a suffix as in ***senāsanampi**,* it must be interpreted on all kinds of ***dhammas*** preached by the Buddha by means of totally interpretation on robe, tree, forest, mountain etc which are of occurrence of ***upanissaya** **paccaya**.* All kinds of living corporeality and mentality and non-living corporeality existing in present period are able to occur the relation of natural determinative dependence indeed. 

This is a kind of relation in which concept-mentality-corporeality benefit mentality. Those causal ***dhammas**,* corporeality-mentality, are occurring in three periods, past, future and  present.  Concept  and  ***nibbāna**,*  however,  are  causal  ***dhammas***  free  from  time  *(**kāla vimutti**).* If those attainments of well-being and prosperity, which will be occurring in future, are strongly attached to be occurred, those corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** called well-being and prosperity are the causal ***dhammas*** of future. It should be understood in this way. 

10. ***purejāta paccaya* (the relation ofprecompatibility)** 

Those  ***dhammas**,*  eye-base  etc,  which  occurred  beforehand  resultant  ***dhammas**,* seeing-consciousness etc, which are capable of benefiting for resultant ***dhammas**,* seeing-
PAGE48

consciousness etc, during static stage of itself, are called the __relation of pre-compatibility *(purajāta*__ *__paccaya__). __(Abhi-A-3-34S,__* __349)__ 

There are of two kinds, to wit, (1) basic precompatibility *(**vatthu**-**purejāta** **paccaya**)* **and** (2) objective pre-compatibility *(**ārammaņa** **purajāta** **paccaya**).* 

1) ***vatthu purajāta*** ***paccaya*** 

**By** means of the relation of basic precompatibility *(**vatthu purajāta** **paccaya**),* these ***dhammas***, 

1. the eye-base benefits seeing-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. the ear-base benefits hearing-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. the nose-base benefits smelling-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. the tongue-base benefits tasting-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
1. the  body-base  benefits  touching-consciousness  and  associating  mental  ***dhammas**,* respectively. 

**PAGE-397** 

2) ***ārammaņa purajāta paccaya*** 

By means of the relation of objective precompatibility, these ***dhammas**,* 

6. the visible-object benefits seeing-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
6. the auditory-object benefits hearing-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
6. the  olfactory-object  benefits  smelling-consciousness  and  associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
6. the sapid-object benefits tasting-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**,* 
6. the tactile-obi ect benefits touching-consciousness and associating mental ***dhammas**.* respectively. 

Fivefold-objects  *(**pañcārammaņa**)*  called  visible-object,  auditory-object,  olfactory- object, sapid-object, tactile-object, benefit five-doors advertence *(**pañcadvārāvajjana**)* and two kinds of   receiving *(**sampaṭicchana**),* called three kinds of mind-element *(**mano dhātu**)* and (10) kinds of dual-sided mental concomitants *(**aññasamāna cetasika**)* excluding effort *(**vīriya**),* pleasurable interest *(**pīti**),* intention *(**chanda**);* by means of the relation of objective precompatibility. 

11. the heart-base *(**hadaya** **vatthu**)* benefits three kinds of mind-element *(**mano** **dhātu**)* and associating mental ***dhammas*** by means of the relation of basic precompatibility *(**vatthu** **purajāta** **paccaya**)* during the life *(**pavatti**).* But at the moment of process of NONE  *(**paṭisandhi**)*  it  is  unable  to  benefit  by  means  of  the  relation  of  basic precompatibility. *(**Paṭṭhāna-1-6,7**)* 

In  this  case,  bases  corporealities  of  eye-ear-nose-tongue-body  means  bases  corporeal ***dhamma*** which are middle life span *(**majjhimdyuka**)* and occur simultaneously with past life- continuum  *(**atīta  bhavańga**).*  Colour  object,  sound-object,  smell-object,  taste-object, touching-object are present objects which are still in static stage but not come of age for 17 mind-moments.  Objects  of  three  kinds  of  mind-elements  *(**manodhātu**)*  are  also  present fivefold-objects  *(**paccuppanna**  **pañcārammaņa**).*  Objects  of  mind-consciousness-element *(**mono  viññāņa**  **dhātu**)*  are  six  kinds  of  objects  appropriately.  In  the  relation  of  object *(**ārammaņa** **paccaya**),* it has been preached as *"**sabbe dhammā**" =* all kinds of ***dhammas**.* In this  case,  it  was  not  preached  on  the  relation  of  objective  precompatibility  *(**ārammaņa purajāta**)*  but  the  relation  of  basic  precompatibility  *(**vatthu**  **purajāta**)*  only  for  mind-

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE51

consciousness-element. That heart-base, as the relation of basic precompatibility, is the heart- base which is unretentive one arising simultaneously with preceding consciousness indeed. At the moment of process of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* the relation of basic precompatibility can not be  concerned  due  to  simultaneous  occurrence  of heart-base  and  mental ***dhammas***  of mind-consciousness-element of NONE *(**paṭisandhi** **mano** **viññāņa** **dhātu**).* The reason why the relation of objective precompatibility of mind-consciousness-element is not preached, is the  fact  that  those  mind-door  cognitive  processes  are  able  to  take  objects  of  corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring in all three periods, past, future and present, 

***ayam  pana  purejātapaccayo  suddharūpameva  hoti,  tañca  kho  uppādakkhaņam atikkamitvā (hitippattam aṭṭhārassavidham rūparūpameva. (Abhi-A-3-371)*** 

The causal ***dhamma*** in the relation of precompatibility is only corporeal ***dhamma**.* Those corporealities are (18) kinds of real corporealities which are reaching in the static stage beyond the arising stage *(**uppāda** **khaņa**).* This is a kind of relation in which corporeality benefits mentality. 

11. **(A) *pacchājāta paccaya* (the relation of post-compatibility)** 

Before  causal  ***dhammas***  occur  resultant  ***dhammas***  has  been  arisen  by  respective causes  accordingly.  These  causal  ***dhammas***  do  not  involve  the  function  of  arising  of *(**uppāda**)* resultant ***dhammas*** because the latter had been arisen beforehand. However they benefit arisen arisen ***dhammas*** in order to be stable in static stage *(**ṭhiti**).* Thus the causal ***dhamma***  which  is  capable  of  benefiting  for  corporeal  ***dhammas***  which  has  been  arisen beforehand by means of supporting for the stability of the latter, is called the **relation of post-compatibility** *(**pacchājāta** **paccaya**).* 

**PAGE-398** 

***Gijjhapotakasarīrānam āhārāsācetanāviya.* (Vs.2-169; *Abhi-A-3-349)*** 

Hatchlings of vulture have strong desire that "they will  get nourishment after the mother came back from searching food". The volition associating with that strong desire is called  ***manosañcetanāhāra***  (nutriment  of  representative  cogitation).  That  nutriment  of representative  cogitation  is  obviously  present  in  the  continuum  of  mentality  at  present moment.  It  is  similar  to  ability  of  existing  of  vulture's  hatchlings  because  those  mental ***dhammas***  including  the  volition  associating  with  strong  desire  to  nourishment *(**āhārāsācetanā**)* are benefiting on continuum of corporealities produced by four causes *(**catu samuṭṭhānika rūpa**)* by means of the relation of post-precompatibility *(**pacchājāta paccaya**).* Therefore is should be recognized on the fact that the example, *"**'gijjhapotakasarīrānam āhārāsācetanāviya**",* is not only an example but also an instance showing how the volition which occurs later benefits corporealities which occur beforehand. *(**Mahāaṭī-2-280**)* 

***pacchājāta cittacetasikā dhammā purejātassa imassa kāyassa pacchājātapaccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-1-7)*** 

***pacchājātāti yassa kāyassa paccayā honti, tasmim uppajjitvā thite jātā. purajātassāti tesam  uppādato  paṭhamataram    jātassa    jātikkhaņam    atikkamitvā    ṭhitippattassa.   imassa   kāyassāti   imassa catusamuṭṭhānikatisamuṭṭṭhānikabhūtaupādārūpasańkhātassa   kāyassa.  ettha  ca  tisamuṭṭhānikakāyoti  āhārasamuṭṭhānassa  abhāvato brahmapārisajjādīnam kāyo veditabbo. (Abhi-A-3-372)*** 

In the realm of five-groups-existence *(**pañcavokāra bhūmi**)* those mental ***dhammas,*** wholesome-unwholesome-resultant-indifferent, which are grouped as sensuous sphere, fine-
PAGE50

material sphere, immaterial sphere, supra-mundane, occurring along with the whole life from beginning of the first life-continuum just after the process of NONE, excluding four resultant consciousness of immaterial sphere, benefit ***tijakāya*** called corporeality produced by ***kamma*** (CPK), corporeality produced by mind (CPM), corporeality produced by temperature (CPT), referring to (fine-material sphere) and corporeality produced by nutriment (CPN) (referring to sensuous sphere), which have been occurred beforehand and are existing in static stage by means of the relation of post-compatibility *(**pacchājāta paccaya**). I* 

***vipākepi  ṭhapetvā  paṭisandhivipākam  avaseso  kāmāvacararūpāvacaravipāko tasseva ekantena pacchājātapaccayo hoti. (Abhi-A-3-372)*** 

In  accordance  with  explanation  of  this  commentary,  it  must  be  omitted  resultant consciousness of NONE *(**paṭisandhi**)* among those resultant ***dhammas**.* This relation of post- compatibility always associates with those relations of presence *(**atthi** **paccaya**)* and non- disappearance *(**avigata** **paccaya**).* The relation  of presence is a  kind of relation  which is capable of benefiting during both causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are existing apparently while the relation of non-disappearance is a kind of relation which is also capable of benefiting during both causal and  resultant ***dhamma*** are existing without disappearing. Therefore it should be recognized the fact that this relation of post-compatibility is only present ***dhamma*** occurring in three-time-phases-moments-called ***uppāda**, **ṭhiti**, **bhańga** (**khaņattaya samńgī**).* It is a kind of relation in which mentality benefits corporeality, indeed. 

**PAGE-399** **(B) Relating to deportment *(iriyāpatha)* and clear comprehension *(sampajañña)*** 

Corporeal  ***dhammas***  relating  to  deportment  and  clear  comprehension  are  also benefited by this relation of post-compatibility. For instance when flexing occurs by the mind desire-to-flex, corporealities produced by four causes *(**catu samuṭṭhānika rūpa**)* which are reaching to static stage always follows in conformity with air-element consisting in CPM desire-to-flex. Similarly those corporeal ***dhammas**,* which have arisen beforehand the mind desire-to-walk, which are reaching in static stage, always follows in conformity with the leading of air-element consisting in CPM desire-to-walk. They occur as walking state of affairs.  They  occur  in  conformity  with  steering  of  bodily  expression  corporeality  *(**kāya** **viññatti rūpa**)* which is occurred by those air-element predominant corporeal units produced by mind. The reason why they occur in that way is that ability of the mind called ***pacchājāta*** benefits those corporeal ***dhammas**.* It should be understood in this way. 

**2.3.l2 *āsevana paccaya* (the relation of habitual recurrence)** 

Those causal ***dhammas*** called preceding impulsions *(**javana**)* which are capable of benefiting for resultant ***dhammas*** called (51) kinds of succeeding impulsions, (52) kinds of mental  concomitants,  excluding  the  first  impulsion  which  occurs  contiguously  and  the impulsion of fruition-absorption, in order to become more powerful in qualities by means of habitual  recurrence,  is  called  the  relation  of  habitual  recurrence  *(**āsevana**  **paccaya**).*  For example)\_\_\_\_ Those endeavorings which occurred previously benefit endeavorings which occur late in order to fulfil proper quality, such as learning literature etc. ***(Abhi-A-3-349;* Vs.2-169)** 

When preceding impulsion benefits succeeding impulsion by means of the relation of habitual  recurrence,  succeeding  impulsion  is  not  only  greater  in  quality  but  also  more powerful than preceding one. Therefore among (7) times of impulsions, the first impulsion which  is  not benefited by  relation  of  habitual  recurrence  is  the  least powerful  while  the 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE53

seventh impulsion is the most powerful due to presence of successive benefiting of preceding ones. Theses words refer to impulsions of cognitive processes which always occur seven times only. In the cognitive process of entering upon attainment *(**samāpajjana vīthi**),* during entering  into  absorption  in  which  numerous  times  of  impulsions  occur,  etc,  preceding impulsion  benefit  succeeding  impulsions  by  means  of  relation  of  habitual  recurrence.  It should be recognized that — as previous reciting and learning benefit reciting and learning of later  ones  in  learning  technologies,  literatures  etc,  in  order  to  become  more  skilled  and powerful — similarly preceding impulsion benefits succeeding impulsion in order to become more powerful. 

1. ***purimā  purimā  kusalā  dhammā  pacchimānam  pacchimānam  kusalānam dhammānam āsevanapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***purimā  purimā  akusalā  dhammā  pacchimānam  pacchimānam  akusalānam dhammānam āsevanapaccayena paccayo.*** 
1. ***purimā  purimā  kiriyābyākatā  dhammā  pacchimānam  pacchimānam kiriyābyākatānam dhammānam āsevanapaccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-1-7)*** 

**PAGE-400*** 

1. (17) kinds of preceding mudane (wholesome impulsions, excluding last impulsion are causal ***dhammas**.* (21) kinds of succeeding wholesome impulsions, excluding first impulsion are resultant ***dhammas**.* 

[Notes: — Wholesome impulsion of sensuous sphere benefits only contiguous wholesome impulsion of sensuous sphere generally. Especially\_\_\_\_ among wholesome impulsions of sensuous sphere, those impulsions associating with knowledge *(**ñāņa sampayutta**)* benefit wholesome  impulsion  of  fine-material  sphere  with  same  feeling  with  itself;  wholesome impulsion  of  immaterial  sphere  and  supra-mundane  wholesome  impulsion,  by  means  of relation of habitual recurrence. It refers to impulsions of sensuous sphere which are present previously  before  impulsions  of  absorption  and  the  Path  within  cognitive  processes  of absorption *(**jhāna vīthi**)* and the Path *(**magga** **vīthi**). **lokuttaro asevanapaccayo nāma natthi.** (**Ahhi-A-3-373**) =* There is no causal ***dhamma*** as the relation of habitual recurrence in supra- mundane impulsions resulting in interpreting on mundane wholesome impulsions only as causal ***dhammas**.* However supra-mundane impulsions can be resultant ***dhammas**,* resulting in interpreting on supra-mundane impulsion of the Path as resultant ***dhammas**.* 

2. (12) kinds of preceding unwholesome impulsions, excluding last impulsion, are causal ***dhammas*** while (12) kinds of succeeding unwholesome impulsions, excluding the first impulsion, are resultant ***dhammas**.* 
2. (18) kinds of preceding indifferent impulsions *(**kiriya javana**),* excluding the last one, are  causal  ***dhammas**,*  while  (18)  kinds  of  succeeding  indifferent  impulsions,  are resultant ***dhammas**.* Thus there are of three kinds in brief. 

Those causal ***dhammas*** benefit resultant ***dhammas*** by means of relation of habitual recurrence. Causal ***dhammas*** were past ***dhammas*** beyond three-time-phases called ***uppāda**, **ṭhiti**,  **bhańga**,*  while  resultant  ***dhammas***  are  still  reaching  into  three-time-phases  and  are called present ***dhammas*** indeed. 

This is the relation in which mentality benefits mentality.  

**2.3.13 *kamma paccaya* (the relation of action)** 

__A. *citta payoga*__*\_\_\_\_* Mentally undertaking in various ways *(__citta__ __payoga__) is* the significant action  of  mind.  That  action  is  also  known  as  both  endeavouring  *(__āyūhana__)*  and  service 
PAGE52

*(**vāpāra**).*  As  significant  action  of  body  is  the  bodily  expression  *(**kāya**  **viññatti**)*  and significant action of language is verbal expression *(**vacī viññatt**i),* similarly\_\_\_\_  significant action  of  mind  is  called  ***cetanā**  (=*  the  nature  of  volition).  That  volition  *(**cetanā**)*  is undertaking of mind *(**citta** **payoga**)* and work of mind *(**vyāpāra**).* As and assistant of chief carpenter has more important works to do than remaining followers, it *(**citta** **payoga**)* is the action with important work in various functions. 

The volitional ***dhamma*** which is capable of benefiting by means of occurrence of various undertaking of that mind (= ***citta** **payoga**),* is called the **relation of action *(kamma paccaya).***  (The  volition  which  is  cause  of  making  functions  of  body,  speech,  mind,  is designated as ***kamma*** (= action). It is also called ***kamma** **paccaya**.* There are of two kinds, to wit, asynchronous action *(**nānākkhaņika** **kamma**)* and compatible action *(**sahajāta** **kamma**).* 

