***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 151 - 200** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN ÑĀ*ŅAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE-151** 

1. death-consciousness falls just after impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness; 
1. death-consciousness  falls  after  life-continuum  which  follows  impulsions  adjacent  to death-consciousness; 
1. death-consciousness  falls  after  registering  consciousness  which  follows  impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness; 
1. death-consciousness falls after life-continuum which follows registering consciousness, that  registering  consciousness  arise  after  impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness; respectively. 

In this explanation relating to swift death the commentator applied the term, death- consciousness as life-continuum. Objects, object of action etc., usually appear very swiftly in the mind-door. With referring to very swift appearance of objects, object of action etc., in the mind-door, the commentator explained that “how object of mental ***dhammas*** can appear so swiftly in this way. It is right. It should be recognized the object, which is mental ***dhammas*** has very swift appearance in the mind-door. Furthermore it should be recognized the fact that it has been shown on swift appearance of object which is mental ***dhammas*** in the mind-door by showing occurrence of mind-door cognitive process which takes any kind of three objects, object of action etc., without occurring body-door cognitive process which takes powerful tactile-object that is corporeal ***dhammas*** produced by beating with mallet in the continuum of small fly. 

In  the  next  method.\_\_\_\_\_  Although  corporal  ***dhammas***,  eye-clear  sensitivity  etc., have objects, visible object etc., they have not objects definitely because corporeal ***dhammas*** are ***anārammaņa dhamma*** which can not take object. It can be said by metaphorical usage called ***ţhānayūpacāra*** by which depended corporeal ***dhammas***, eye-clear-sensitivity which is base (***ţhāna***), has object through considering to visible seeing-consciousness which is dweller (***ţhānī***).  These  objects  of  mental  ***dhammas***  means  definite  objects  indeed.  Therefore  the commentator explained that “how object of mental ***dhammas*** can appear so swiftly in this way” in order to show mental ***dhammas*** which have objects definitely. (***Mūlaţī-2-104,105***) 

**4.3.A Emblem of destination (*gatinimitta*)** 

The term, ***gatinimitta***, means any kind of colour which is present in the destined realm.  That  colour  usually  appears  in  the  mind-door  by  the  time  adjacent  to  death- consciousness. Among those destined places or realms, when emblem of destination of hell appears for a being who will become denizen of the hell, it is similar to big iron pot. When emblem of destination appears by the time adjacent to death consciousness of a person who is destined  to be  human being,  red-coloured  woolen  rug-like  inner  wall  of  mother’s  womb appears  in  the  mind-door.  When  emblems  of  destination  of  heavenly  being  appear  for  a person who is destined to be heavenly being, the tree of plenty, celestial abodes etc, would be appeared in the mind-door. 

Thus, three are three kinds of objects of ***paţisandhi***, viz, 

1. action (***kamma***), 
1. emblem of action performance (***kammnimitta***) 
1. emblem of destination (***gatinimitta***), respectively, in brief. (***Abhi-A-2-149***) 

**PAGE-152** 

***Pali Quotation (Mūlaţī-2-105) (Anuţī-2-115)*** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

There are infinite varieties of objects called object of action, object of emblem of action-performance, object of emblem of destination by means of realm, arising of mind moment  (***cittuppāda***)  etc.,  in  detailed  method  resulting  in  saying  as  “in  brief”  by commentator.  Sub  Commentator  Sayadaw  (***Mūlaţīkā***)  explained  the  words  “by  means  of realm, arising of mind moments”, with referring to the object of action. Classification through realm,  arising  of  mind  moment  can  also  be  available  in  object  of  emblem  of  action performance  really.  Due  to  presence  of  (6)  kinds  of  objects  of  the  emblem  of  action performance, it is also available to classify in emblem of action performance. Varieties of emblems of destination are various visible-objects i.e., brown, shining white, red, yellow etc. ***(Mūlaţī-2-105) (Anuţī-2-115)*** 

[Although it is explanation on emblem of destination as visible-object only, some suggested  that  remaining  objects,  sound,  smell  etc  are  also  available  as  emblems  of destination.] 

***Pali Quotation (Abhidhammattha sangaha)*** 

According to explanation, “***gatiyā nimittam gatinimittam***”, newly coming existence’s objects usually appear beforehand by the time adjacent to death-consciousness. That emblem of  destination  also  varies  two  kinds,  i.e., ***upalabhitabba gatinimitta***  and ***upabhogabhūta gatinimitta***. The place which is worth acquiring, reaching directly is called ***upalabhitabba gatinimitta***.  Paraphernalia  which  would be  experienced  and  felt  in  that  destined place  is ***upabhoga gatinimitta.*** 

When emblem of destination appears by the time adjacent to death-consciousness of a person who is destined to be human being, if red-coloured rug-like inner wall of mother’s womb appears in mind-door, that emblem of destination is ***upalabhitabbagatinimitta***. If any other human beings’ paraphernalia appear, that is called ***upabhoga gatinimitta***. 

If emblem of destination of celestial abode appear in the continuum of being who is destined to be heavenly being, that object is called ***upalabhitabba gatinimitta***. If female heavenly  being,  the  tree  of  plenty,  garden,  pond  etc,  appear,  those  objects  are  called ***upabhoga gatinimitta***. If emblem of destination of hell appears in the continuum of being who is destined to be denizen of hell, that object is called ***upalabhitabba gatinimitta***. If dog, crow, vulture, guard of hell, fires of hell etc., appear, those objects are called ***upabhoga gatinimitta***. 

Dwelling places of forest and mountain range which appear in the continuum of being who is destined to be animal are ***upalabhitabba gatinimitta*** while shrubs, brushwood etc., are called ***upabhoga gatinimitta***. 

**PAGE-153** 

One opinion explained that object of cloud of darkness would be appeared in the continuum of being who is destined to be ghost at the time adjacent to death-consciousness. In this case, emblems of destination called ocean, river banks where ghosts dwell can appear in the mind-door of that person. Dwelling places of ghosts, town, village etc., are called ***upalabhitabba gatinimitta*** while paraphernalia of ghosts’ life, faces, urine, snot, spittle etc are called ***upabhoga gatinimitta***. 

All emblems of destination mentioned above are visible-object only. (There is no collectiveness of visible object free from partial ones and therefore it means collectiveness of many visible objects which are ultimate realities.) During appearing of those emblems of destination, some appear as it encounters in dwelling places of themselves. Some appear as it 
PAGE3

would appear suddenly from here and there. Some appear as he reaches into either hell or heaven. During some persons have got coma in recent time, emblems of destination appear as they seem to be reach to hell, heaven, big forest together with friends, of a town or village near coastline. (***Paramattha Dīpanī-256-icchāsaya***) 

**4.3.B Opinion of *Paramatha Dīpanī*** 

In  ***Abhidhammatta  Sangaha***,  the  most  Venerable  Anuruddhā  explain  that “***kammabalena channam dvārānam aññatarasamim paccupaţţhāti***” = among those three kinds of objects appears in any kind of (6) doors due to efficiency of definite action (***janaka kamma***) which will give rise to occur consequence ***paţisandhi***. In ***Paramattha Dīpanī***, the most Venerable Ledi Sayadaw explained that the word, ***kammabalena*** = due to efficiency of definite action”, can be available in “generally” only. 

These kinds of objects, viz., 

1. the object which is frequently practiced by some (***āciņņakamma***), 
1. the object which is performed recently just before death (***āsanna kamma***), 
1. the object which is remembered through warning of relatives, 
1. the object which appears by thinking of oneself, 

can appear by the time adjacent to death-consciousness due to presence of some factors, frequent practising etc., but not due to efficiency of action”…. explained by the most Venerable Ledi Sayadaw. (***Paramattha Dīpanī-256-icchāsaya***) 

**4.3.C The person who appeared emblem of destination** 

When  most  practising  ***meditators***  are  observed  it  found  that  those  persons  who appeared object of emblem of destination were very few. When a ***meditator*** keeps in mind corporeality-mentality occurring at the time adjacent to death, objects of action and objects of emblem  of  destination  appeared  before  impulsion  adjacent  to  death-consciousness.  At impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness, however, an emblem of destination, inner wall of mother’s womb, which had wollen rug-like red colour, appeared in the mind-door. 

**PAGE-154** 

At the periods before impulsions adjacent to  death-consciousness, both objects of action, i.e., offering of food, flowers on flat ground around a pagoda and image of teaching to some nuns and objects of emblem of action performance, i.e., the image of pagoda, offering food, flowers etc., appeared in the mind-door. When ignorance, craving, clinging, which were occurring during cultivating those actions, were scrutinized the wish in a way that “may I become a person who can serve *bhikkhus*, was also found. 

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as a person who can serve *bhikkhus*. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that kind of life. 
1. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment to that kind of life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volition of offering food, flowers on flat ground around a pagoda. 
1. Action  is  the  efficiency  of  action  of  those  wholesome  volition  groups  which  were deposited  in  the  continuity  of  corporeality-mentality  after  perishing  away  of  those formations. 

The  phenomenon  of  causal  relationship  called  obvious  arising  of  consequence corporeality-mentality, ***paţisandhi*** five aggregates of present life etc., due to presence of those causal ***dhammas***, was also scrutinized by insight. Even though those objects of action and emblem of action performance appeared for a long time before impulsions adjacent to 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE66

death-consciousness, by the time impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness wollen rug-like red colour was found as striking a match. It was emblem of destination called inner wall of mother’s  womb.  Afterwards  death-consciousness  falls  successively.  When  objects  of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death-consciousness of present life are checked only that visible- object  called  wollen  rug-like  red  colour  is  taken  as  object  again  consistently.  Due  to efficiency of wholesome action of offering of food, flowers, open oil lamp on flat ground around  a  pagoda,  that  emblem  of  destination  appeared  in  the  mind-door  consequently, resulting in attaining a kind of life who can serve *bhikkhus* really. 

**PAGE – 155** 

**5. General Knowledge on *paţisandhi* (process of newly occurrence of next existence, NONE)** 

1. **Various kinds of *paţisandhi* and deserving of realms** 

During keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of successive past lives and successive future lives general knowledge on ***paţisandhi*** (process of **n**ewly **o**ccurrence of **n**ext  **e**xistence,  **NONE**)  should  be  understood  theoretically  beforehand.  Only  when  one understands about ***paţisandhi*** can he keep in mind accurately which kind of ***paţisandhi*** had occurred in what kind of past live and how many numbers of consciousness and mental concomitants were occurred in that ***paţisandhi*** mind moment. 

1. How many kinds of ***paţisandhi*** are present? 
1. How many kinds of ***paţisandhi*** consciousness are present? 
1. Which kind of ***paţisandhi*** with what kind of consciousness occurs in what kind of existence? 
1. Which is the object of ***paţisandhi***? 
1. There are (20) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** including ***paţisandhi*** of mindless being. 
1. There are (19) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** consciousness, viz., 
1) Rootless  unwholesome  consequence  with  neutrality  investigating  consciousness (***ahetuka akusalavipāka upekkhā santīraņa citta***) = (1) kind;  
1) Rootless  wholesome  consequence  with  neutrality  investigating  consciousness (***ahetuka kusalavipāka upekkhā santīraņa citta***) = (1) kind; 
1) Great consequence consciousness = (8) kinds; 
1) Fine-material consequence consciousness = (5) kinds (Pantad Method); 
1) Immaterial consequence consciousness = (4) kinds; 

Totally in (19) kinds. 

3. Among those (19) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** consciousness\_\_\_\_\_ 
1) One has got ***paţisandhi*** through rootless unwholesome consequence with neutrality investigating  consciousness  called  ***akusalavipāka  ahetuka  manoviññāņadhātu***  in four woeful existences. If a righteous ***meditator*** had got experience in any kind of four woeful existences in previous existences, that ***paţisandhi*** mind moment consisted of (11) mental ***dhammas***. (See tables of ***nāmakammaţţhāna***.) 
1) Those  persons,  i.e.,  congenital  blind,  congenital  deaf,  congenital  idiot,  congenital mute, hermaphrodise or eunuch (***paņdaka***) etc., have got ***paţisandhi*** through rootless wholesome  consequence  with  neutrality  investigating  consciousness  called ***kusalavipāka ahetuka manoviññāņadhātu*** in human world. 
PAGE5

3) Those persons with great luck and perfection have got ***paţisandhi*** through any one of 

(8) kinds of great consequence consciousness called ***sahetuka kāmāvacaravipāka*** in 

6) kinds of sensual heavenly spheres and human world appropriately. 

**PAGE-156** 

4) Those persons have got ***paţisandhi*** through (5) kinds of fine-material consequence consciousness in fine-material spheres appropriately. 
4) Those persons have got ***paţisandhi*** through (4) kinds of immaterial consequence in *brahma*s of immaterial Spheres appropriately. 

One has got ***paţisandhi*** through such ***paţisandhi*** consciousness in such sphere, that ***paţisandhi*** only is designated as the ***paţisandhi*** which is conformity with that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness. ***(Vs-2-180, 181)*** 

4. **Three Kinds of objects of *paţisandhi* (next method)** 

There are three kinds of objects of ***paţisandhi*** consciousness, viz., 

1) past object, 
1) present object, 
1) conceptual object (***paññatti***) which is not deserving to be said as past, present. 

It should be recognized the ***paţisandhi*** of mindless being has no object because that kind of ***paţisandhi*** has got only corporeality called vital nonad corporeal units (***jīvitanavaka kalāpa***) which are incapable of taking object and those are called ***anārammaņa*** ***dhamma***. 

Among those three kinds of objects –  

1. **The  Past  Object**  \_\_\_\_\_  Objects  of  boundless  consciousness  ***paţisandhi*** (***viññānañcāyatana***  ***paţisandhi***)  and  neither-perception-nor-non-perception ***paţisandhi*** (***neva saññā nāsaññāyatana*** ***paţisandhi***) are past objects only. The former is produced by the wholesome action of absorption of boundless consciousness. That wholesome  absorption  takes  object  of  consciousness  of  boundless  space (***ākāsānañcāyatana  viññāņa***)  which  is  called  ***pathamāruppaviññāņa***  (first immaterial  consciousness).  Similarly  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  of  boundless consciousness  sphere  also  takes  object  of  that  consciousness  of  boundless  space which  was  past  ***dhamma***  only  because  that  consciousness  of  boundless  space occurred before consciousness of boundless consciousness sphere arises. Similarly consciousness  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  also  takes  object  of consciousness of emptiness (***ākiñcaññāyatana viññāņa***) which is called ***tatiyāruppa*** ***viññāņa*** (third immaterial consciousness). That consciousness of emptiness sphere was also past ***dhamma*** which occurred before consciousness of neither-perception- nor-non-perception.  Thus  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  consequence ***paţisandhi*** consciousness also takes object of that past wholesome deed of emptiness sphere. Therefore – 
1) the object of ***paţisandhi*** of boundless sphere is object of past lofty emblem of action (a***kammanimitta***) which is wholesome deed of boundless space sphere. 
1) The object of ***paţisandhi*** of neither-perception-nor-non-perception is object of past lofty emblem of action which is wholesome deed of emptiness sphere. 
2. **Past and present objects \_\_\_\_\_** Objects of (10) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** of sensual sphere, i.e., rootless  unwholesome  consequence  with  neutrality  investigating  consciousness,  rootless wholesome consequence with neutrality investigating consciousness and (8) kinds of great consequence consciousness, might be both past and present objects accordingly. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE88

3. **Conceptual object (*pannatti arammana or navattabbarammana*)**\_\_\_\_\_ Objects of these 
7) kinds of ***paţisandhi***, i.e., (5) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** of fine-material sphere, ***paţisandhi*** of boundless space sphere and emptiness sphere, are conceptual objects which are not deserving to be said as past, present. ***(Abhi-A-2-149, Vs-2-181)*** 

**PAGE-157** 

It will be continued.\_\_\_\_\_ Thus the process of **NONE** called ***paţisandhi*** arises by taking object of any suitable one of three kinds contiguously after death-consciousness which has the object of either past ***dhamma*** or conceptual ***dhamma*** that is not deserving to be said as past, present. There is no death-consciousness which has the object of present ***dhamma***. Therefore it should be understood the nature of occurrence of ***paţisandhi*** which has any suitable one of three kinds of objects called past, present, concept through joyful ***paţisandhi***, or  woeful ***paţisandhi***, just  after  death-consciousness  which  has  any  one of  two  kinds  of objects called past, conceptual ***dhammas***. ***(Abhi-A-2-149, Vs-2-181)*** 

2. **Nature of transferring process from sensual joyful existence to woeful existence** 

What is the nature of transferring process? 

It will be explained the nature of transferring process from sensual joyful existence to woeful existence previously. – Due to presence of the preaching of the Supreme Buddha in a way that “***tānissa tasamim samaye olambanti*** = as shape of peak of mountain appears at east side of it through efficiency of sunshine which is shinning west side of it at evening those unwholesome actions (***kamma***) which had been done previously appear in the mind-door of the person who is moribund at the time quite close to death” ***(M-1-203)***, while the person who has got unwholesome actions, who exists in sensual joyful existence, is lying down on the bed at moribund moment any one kind of objects of actions which had been cultivated previously (= images of weapons, stick, sword, arrow, prey, piece of flesh, bones etc., ) or objects  of  emblem  of  action  (***kammanimitta***)  appears  in  the  mind-door.  At  the  time contiguous after 

1) impulsions of cognitive process with registerings as ending or  
1) pure impulsions of cognitive process without registering 

which arises by taking that impinging object of any kind of action or emblem of action, death-consciousness arises by taking object of the life-continuum. [it is explained that “death- consciousness arises by taking object of the life-continuum” because objects of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum and death-consciousness for one life are the same as natural fixed law. With regarding to these words those sessions (***vāra***)  i.e., death-consciousness which falls after registering  and  death-consciousness  which  falls  after  impulsion,  are  shown.  In  previous chapter  those  sessions  (***vāra***)  i.e.,  life-continuum  falls  after  registering  and  then  death- consciousness falls after life-continuum; and life-continuum falls after impulsion and then death-consciousness falls after life-continuum, has been shown.] 

By  the  time  just  after  cessation  of  that  death-consciousness  the  ***paţisandhi*** consciousness which is inclusive in woeful existence arises by taking object of impulsions of cognitive process adjacent to death-consciousness, which impinges into the  mind-door at moribund moment, which is either the object of action (***kamma***) or the object of emblem of action (***kamma nimitta***) through inclining efficiency of defilements, ignorance, craving etc., which are not eradicated by the Noble Path ***dhamma***. This is the ***paţisandhi*** with object of past  ***dhamma***,  which  arises  contiguously  after  death-consciousness  with  object  of  past ***dhamma***. (***(Abhi-A-2-149, Vs-2-181)*** 
PAGE7

**PAGE-158** 

***anupacchinnakilesa balavināmitam \_\_\_\_\_*** 

Any kind of objects, object of action etc., can appear in the mind-door of moribund person  before  defilements,  ignorance,  craving  etc.,  are  eradicated  by  the  Noble  Path ***dhamma***. Among those three kinds of objects, object of action etc., continuity of mind can bend and incline towards the next existence called new one by taking object of any one appropriately.  The  commentator  Sayadaw,  therefore,  explained “***anupacchinnakilesabalavināmitam*** = the ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises through inclining efficiency of defilements, ignorance, craving etc., which are not eradicated by the Noble Path ***dhamma***”. 

It is right. After continuity of mind was inclined ***paţisandhi*** consciousness which is partial of those continuity of mind is also inclined. It should be recognized inclination of the whole continuity of mind can not occur without inclination of partial continuity of mind. (***Mūlaţī-2-105***) 

By the time adjacent to death any kind of objects, action etc., appears in the mind- door  and  the  continuity  of  mind  usually  inclines  towards  new  coming-into-existence  by taking that object. For instance, it is similar to inclination of mind towards the journey which is intended to go though one arrange for that journey. If the whole continuity of mind inclines towards new coming-into-existence, ***paţisandhi*** consciousness within that continuity of mind will also be inclined towards that new coming-into-existence. It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ The whole continuity of mind is unable to incline without inclination of ***paţisandhi*** consciousness which is inclusive in the whole continuity of mind towards new coming-into-existence. 

The inclination towards new coming-into-existence is resulted from occurrence of well  accomplishment  to  cultivate  and  arrange  wholesome  formations  and  unwholesome formations  through  craving  on  coming-into-existence  which  is  sufficient  to  incline  new coming-into-existence in that way. It is right. – In such continuity of mind of worldling and ***sekkha*** persons (=lower seven Noble Ones) have got incessant impregnation with the craving which is heartfelt desire on coming-into-existence as volition (***cetanā***), wholesome formation etc., in that continuity of mind only the ***paţisandhi*** consciousness which is inclusive in the next coming-into-existence arises consequently. When that consciousness arises in that new coming-into-existence that craving seems to be exhorting to incline. Therefore it is said that ***“anupacchinnakilesabalavināmitam”. (Anuţī-2-115)*** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Mūlaţī-2-105)*** 

***(Anuţī-2-115) (Sam-A-3-51)(Sam-ţī-2-323) (Mūlaţī-2-104)*** 

**PAGE-159** 

In all ***paţisandhi*** of joyful and woeful existences those impulsions adjacent to death- consciousness,  which  incline  towards  ***paţisandhi***  of  woeful  existence  are  unwholesome impulsions  only,  while  those  impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness,  which  incline towards  ***paţisandhi***  of  joyful  existence,  on  the  other  hand,  only  wholesome  impulsions indeed.  Thus  Noble  teachers  decided  for  impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness. Evidence of ***Pāli*** Text of the Supreme Buddha is ***Ādittapariyāya Sutta*** as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE10

“*Bhikkhus*… (while any kind of object, visible-object etc., if one obsesses bulk of form and shape which are factor of recognizing as man, woman, beautiful object, ugly object etc., as either man or woman, either beautiful or ugly object, in other way, if one obsesses ‘small sign of’ partial recognition marks of bodily parts, i.e., eye, eyebrow, gesture of hand and foot, gesture of smile etc., “which are capable of showing defilements apparently” in the continuum  of  person  who  obsesses  in  that  way)  the  continuity  of  mind  which  is  worth designating  as  ***kamma***  ***viññāņa***  (=  potential  consciousness  which  can  give  rise  to  occur ***paţisandhi*** of new coming-into-existence in future) which is tying with pleasingness on either big sign of form and shape which are factor of recognizing as man, woman etc., or small sign of partial recognition marks of bodily parts, i.e., eye, eyebrow, gesture of hand and foot, gesture of smile etc., which are capable of showing defilements apparently, will be existing (occurring). 

If one passes away that kind of period at which he is tying with pleasingness in that, there will be obvious factor that he has to reach any kind of two destinations called hell and animal realm indeed”. 

The  Supreme  Buddha  preached  in  this  way.  Therefore  unwholesome  impulsions adjacent  to  death-consciousness  are  powerful  dependence  factor  of  ***paţisandhi***  of  woeful existence.  It  should  be  recognized  wholesome  impulsions  are  also  powerful  dependence factor of ***paţisandhi*** of joyful existence. (***Mūlaţī-2-105***) 

In  ***Ādittapariyāya  Sutta,  Saļāyatana  Vagga,  Samyutta***  it  is  preached  that  if impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness  fall  with  greed  by  taking  objects  which  are deserving to occur greed, one will reach into any one of two kinds of destinations called hell and animal realms surely. Due to direct showing on hell and animal, it should be recognized destination of ghost realm is also possible to reach. Similarly if impulsions adjacent to death- consciousness  fall  with  anger,  delusion,  it  should  be  recognized  one  can  reach  woeful existences in future surely. 

**PAGE-160** 

Therefore every one should like to prepare so as not to fall unwholesome impulsions during moribund period beforehand. This is how ***paţisandhi*** of woeful existence with past object of action or past object of emblem of action (***kammanimitta***) arises contiguously after death-consciousness which has got object of past ***dhamma***. 

3. **Noble Ones called Arahants *Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Mahāţī-2-299)*** 

Any kind of objects called action-emblem of action-destination never appear in the mind-door  of  moribund  Arahant  at  the  time  adjacent  to  final  death-consciousness  called ***parinibbāna cuti*** because the Arahant has accomplished to eradicate defilements completely through Noble Path ***dhammas*** in all aspects, resulting in extinguishment of endeavouring to arise every kind of coming-into-existence. Due to non-appearance of any object in that way, every action called ***kamma*** which had been cultivated in infinite successive rounds of rebirth, which  is  still  present  apparently  can  not  give  rise  to  occur  ***paţisandhi***  in  the  absence association of defilement. (***Mahāţī***-2-299) 

4. **Emblem of destination of woeful existence (*duggati gatinimitta*)** 
PAGE9

While another one is lying on the bed at moribund moment, as mentioned above, emblems of destination of woeful existence, colour of flame etc., which are occurring in hell etc.,  appear  in  the  mind-door,  due  to  efficiency  of  unwholesome  action  which  had been cultivated before death. In the continuum of that being after cessation of two times of life- continuum three kinds of consciousness of cognitive process, i.e., 

1. one time of mind-door adverting; 
1. five times of impulsions adjacent to death, due to presence of weak efficiency at moribund period; 
1. two times of registering arise by taking object of that appearing emblem of destination called ***gatinimitta***. 

Afterwards once death-consciousness arises by taking object which is the same as object of life-continuum. Then (11) mind moments (two times of life-continuum, eight times of consciousness of cognitive process, one time of death-consciousness have passed through so far as this extent of continuity of mind moments. (This is the session (***vāra***) in which death-consciousness falls after registering.) Then ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises by taking object of that emblem of destination which has got the life-span of remaining (5) times of mind-moments,  which  is  the  object  of  those  impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness (=moribund cognitive process). [In this case, life-span of the visible-object which is emblem of destination is demarcated by (16) mind-moments.] 

This  is  how  ***paţisandhi***  with  object  of  present  ***dhamma***  arises  contiguously  after death-consciousness with object of past ***dhamma***. ***(Abhi-A-2-149, 150, Vs-2-181)*** 

**PAGE-161** 

**(16) times, (17) times**\_\_\_\_\_ There is a reasonable question that is it opposite between the explanation by which “the life-span of object of this emblem of destination has got (16) mind-moments”  and  the  explanations  of  commentaries  and  sub-commentaries  by  which corporeal ***dhammas*** have got the life-span of (17) mind-moments or (51) times of sub-mind- moments? It is not opposite between each other. 

In above commentaries the commentator Sayadaw alluded the method by which (16 mind-moments are counted from the beginning  of static phase (***ţhitikāla***) of that visible- object by means of the static phase of object, that emblem of destination, which is suitable to benefit  for  arising  of  life-continuum  (vibration)  consciousness  (***bhavangacalana***).  This method is shown because the arising phase (***upppādakhaņa***) of visible-object of that emblem of destination is not suitable to benefit for arising of life-continuum consciousness. Why only static phase is suitable to benefit for arising of life-continuum (vibration) but not arising phase? It is because at least only when one mind-moment has gone beyond visible-object can appear in the mind-door, resulting in suitableness to benefit for arising of life-continuum (vibration). Unless it has gone beyond one mind-moment it is not suitable to benefit. Only the static phase, therefore, is appropriate sub-mind-moment. (***Abhidhammatthavibhāvanī ţīkā***) 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Abhidhammatthavibhavani)*** 

5. **Flame of the hell** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Mahāţī-20299, 300)*** 

Above sayings of commentary that “the emblem of destination, flame colour of hell etc., usually appear in the mind-door of moribund person”, are said by means of similarity to 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE12

flame colour etc., which are occurring those hells etc., It is right. Not only those flame of hell etc., appear in mind-door of that person, but it must also be added colours of cane brake hell, red silk cotton tree hell, the hell in which trees bear leaves which are the same structure of four-edged dagger etc. With regarding to the word, ***ādi*** (=etc.,) found in “***narakādīsu***”, those kinds of colours which are inclusive in inhabiting places of ghosts, animals must also be inferred collectively. 

The word, “***manodvāre āpāthamāgacchati***”, as various objects of dream appear in the mind-door of person who is asleep or as various kinds of objects of divine eye appear in the mind-door of the righteous person with the Super-psychic Knowledge of Divine Eye, in the continuum of being who is going to hell realm the visible-object called sight-base, colour which is impinged by the efficiency of action with potentiality to produce its result reaches as acquired object in the mind-door only at moribund period. (Mahti-2-299, 300) 

**PAGE-162** 

According to this explanation, the visible-objects, flame of hell etc., which appear in the mind-door of moribund being who is going to hell realm, are not real flame of hell. It should be recognized it is only visible object of emblem of destination, which is produced by efficiency of action (***kamma***), which is similar to flame of hell. 

6. **How emblem appears in fivefold doors called *pañcadvāra*** 

In the continuum of another one the inferior object which is factor of lust etc., reaches as impingement of any kind of fivefold doors at moribund period. In the continuum of that being,  at  the  end  of  determining  consciousness  which  occurs  within  such  continuity  of cognitive process, (5 ) times of impulsions and two times of registering consciousness arise due to presence of weak efficiency at moribund period. Afterwards one death-consciousness arises by taking object of life-continuum only. 

Thus (15) mind moments, viz., 

Life-continuum ……………………..  (2) times, 

1. five-doors-adverting  ………………..  (1) time, 
1. seeing-consciousness…………………  (1) time, 
1. receiving   ……………………………  (1) time, 
1. investigating …………………………   (1) time, 
1. determining        ………………………  (1) time, 
1. impulsions …………………………….  (5) times, 
1. registerings ……………………………  (2) times, death-consciousness……………………  (1) time, 

have  passed  through  so  far  as  this  extent  of  continuity  of  mind  moments.  Then ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises by  taking that inferior object  which has the life span of remaining one mind moment only. This ***paţisandhi*** is also a kind of ***paţisandhi*** which has object of present ***dhamma***, which arises contiguously after death-consciousness which had object of past ***dhamma***. 

These phenomena are how two kinds of ***paţisandhi***, viz., 

1. ***paţisandhi*** of woeful existence, which takes object of past ***dhamma***, 
1. ***paţisandhi***  of  woeful  existence,  which  takes  object  of  present  ***dhamma***,  arise contiguously after death-consciousness of joyful existence, which has got object of past ***dhamma***, and these phenomena are deserving to show previously. ***(Abhi-A-2- 150, Vs-2-182)*** 
PAGE11

***rāgādihetubhūtam hīnamārammaņam*** \_\_\_\_\_ 

The inferior object which is factor of lust etc., means undesirable object which is deserving to occur as object of unwholesome consequence mental ***dhammas***. It is right – That undesirable object which is factor of those lust etc., can also occur as factor of lust through thinking over and over again. It should be recognized in this way. ***(Mūlaţī-2-300)*** 

**PAGE-163** 

In  case  of  the  term  “***iţţha***  (=desirable)”,  there  are  not  only  real  desirable  objects naturally but artificial desirable object made by thinking over and over (***parikappaiţţha***). That kind  of  object,  actually,  is  undesirable  object  (***aniţţhārammaņa***).  If  one  obsesses  that undesirable object as desirable one through thinking over and over, it is artificial desirable object called ***parikappaiţţhārammaņa***. It means undesirable object can also be occurred as factor of lust through thinking over and over. For instance\_\_\_\_\_ Faeces are desirable object of dogs. 

In the next method, only the occurrence which is the factor of lust etc., which arises together with direct productive action called ***janakakamma*** that can produce unwholesome consequence;  which  arises  together  with  volitions  of  impulsions  adjacent  to  death- consciousness  which  is  similar  to  that  direct  productive  action,  is  designated  as  inferior (***hīna***)  occurrence.  (Those  volitions  of  impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness  and unwholesome direct productive action have the same not only occurrence of action but also object of emblem of action (***kammanimitta***). Due to presence of the same occurrence in that way, it is said “***tam sadisa***”. 

It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ That object is also object of unwholesome consequence which is not worth desiring by means of action because it is object of unwholesome action which can give rise to occur worries in future. ***(Mūlaţī-2-105)*** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Anuţī-2-115)*** 

Even though it is natural desirable object, if it is object of inferior unwholesome action, it will be undesirable one, due to inferior occurrence through the efficiency of relation of object (***ārammaņa paccaya***). It means it is the object of unwholesome consequence due to occurrence of undesirable one. ***(Anuţī-2-115)*** 

If it is desirable object, which fault can be arisen? – Consequence of unwholesome action which arises by taking desirable object never has got object of unwholesome emblem of  action because  unwholesome  consequence  is  not  deserving  to  occur  as ***dhamma***  with desirable object (***iţţhārammaņa*** ***dhamma***). Thus the fault can arise. (***Mūlaţī-2-105***) 

The basic meaning of inferior object which is factor of lust etc., is worth desiring as only emblem of action (***kammanimitta***) which must be past ***dhamma***. Very weak impulsions of fivefold doors can not give rise to occur ***paţisandhi***. 

How  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  can  be  designated  as  the  ***paţisandhi***  with  present object of emblem of action? The answer is as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

During moribund period present object of emblem of action which impinges into the fivefold doors is not only belonging to continuity of object of action which is performed at moribund period but also similar to that object of emblem of action. It should be recognized in this way. (***Mūlaţī***-***2-105***) 

Commentary explains above section of how object of emblem of action appear in fivefold doors because that section is intended to be shown after explaining how object of action,  emblem  of  action  appear  in  mind-door.  According  to  specification  of  that 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE14

commentary, It should be recognized only present object of emblem of action can appear in fivefold doors. 

**PAGE-164** 

The  word,  ***kammanimitta***  (=  emblem  of  action)  means  that  the  volition  (***cetanā***) associating with each impulsion which consists in mind-door cognitive process adjacent to near  death  impulsions  of  fivefold  doors-cognitive  process  is  designated  as  the  action (***kamma***)  and  then  the  object  of  that  action  is  designated  as  ***kammanimitta***  (emblem  of action). That object of  emblem of action is present occurring ***dhamma*** while near death impulsions of eye-door cognitive process is occurring, if it is the object brought and shown by teacher, parents etc., such as flower etc. Among three kinds of present it is the object of emblem of action which is worth saying as continuity present (***santatipaccuppanna***). 

The Sub-commentary called ***Mūlaţīkā*** Sayadaw explained on the object of emblem of action of that eye-door-cognitive process both in a way that “***āsannakatakammārammaņa santatiyam uppannam*** = it occurs within continuity of object of action performed moribund period” because it occurs within continuity of object of mind-door cognitive process which occurred before near death impulsions of eye-door-cognitive process previously, and another way  that  “***tamsadisa***  =  those  objects  of  emblem  of  actions  are  the  same  as  each  other” because those objects of emblem of action of mind-door-cognitive process and near death impulsions  of  eye-door-cognitive  process  are  the  same  as  each  other,  i.e.,  flower  etc., occurring  in  nature  of  continuity present.  According  to  these  words,  --  while  near  death impulsions of fivefold-doors are occurring the object of that cognitive process is not present object of emblem of action certainly. However it should be recognized it is emblem of action which is ***sadisūpacāra*** (metaphorical usage of similar condition) because it occurs within continuity present and it is identical with that emblem of action which is object of previous mind-door cognitive process. Why it is? – It is because that object of impulsion of fivefold doors can not be designated as  “emblem of action = object of action” certainly because volitions of impulsions of fivefold doors, especially volitions of near death impulsions of fivefold  doors  are  inefficacy  to  produce  consequence  ***paţisandhi***,  resulting  from  un- accomplishment  of  action.  Therefore  during  scrutinizing  causal  ***dhammas***  the  righteous ***meditator*** should not scrutinize efficiency of action of volitions of impulsions of fivefold doors but that of action of volitions of impulsions which are inclusive in mind-door-cognitive processes. 

There is a reasonable question that if object of near death impulsions of fivefold-door- cognitive process is not inferred as ***sadisa kammanimitta*** (metaphorical same emblem of action ) which is continuity present but certain emblem of action which is momentary present (***khaņapaccuppanna***) what fault will be present? The answer is as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

If object of near death impulsions of cognitive process is inferred as the nature of momentary present, nature of certain emblem of action other than the nature that object of near death impulsions of cognitive process is worth inferring as both the nature of continuity present and metaphorical same emblem of action, only those impulsions adjacent to death (= impulsions of fivefold doors adjacent to death) will be both the action that can appear object of ***paţisandhi***  and  direct productive  action  (***janakakamma***)  which  can  give  rise  to  occur ***paţisandhi*** consequence. ***(Mūlaţī-2-105)*** 

Sub-commentator Sayadaw continued to explain the following words, due to presence of reasonable question that “can those volitions of impulsions of fivefold doors adjacent to death be occur as both volitions of impulsions which accomplish as the action that can appear object of ***paţisandhi*** and volitions of impulsions which are direct productive actions that can give rise to occur ***paţisandhi*** consequence. 
PAGE13

Those impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness, which are both similar to access (***upacāra***) of ***paţisandhi*** and are arising as making over the object for consciousness and mental concomitants of ***paţisandhi*** in a way that “your ***paţisandhi*** must arise by taking this object”, cannot occur as impulsions that can produce ***paţisandhi***. 

**PAGE-165** 

It is right. – In ***Pāli*** Text  of ***Dhamma***-***sanganņī*** the Exalted One had preached that “***katattā upacitattā*** ***(Abhi-1-104)*** = the seeing-consciousness which has  got visible-object only, which associates with neutrality feeling arises, due to occurrence of accomplishment of action (***kamma***). 

[The term, ***kata***, means only once performing while the term, ***upacita***, means repeated performing over and over.] Those actions are difficult to produce it’s consequence through once  performing  only  but  repeated  performing  over  and  over  can  give  rise  to  occur opportunity to produce it’s consequence. 

It will be continued.\_\_\_\_\_ How impulsions adjacent to death, which are the same as that ***paţisandhi***, which occur a cognitive process which is similar to cognitive process in which ***paţisandhi*** arises, during moribund period, can be occurred as accomplished action? It can not. Furthermore – it is unable to please the object of emblem of action which appear that moribund  period  exceedingly  (due  to  occurrence  of  very  weak  efficiency  of  impulsions adjacent to death). 

Those impulsions of mundane world, actually, are unable to produce its consequence within one cognitive process as impulsions of path of Supra-mundane world. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(M-3-257)*** 

That being had accomplished unwholesome action which was factor of disagreeable feeling in very far previous lives; or that being had accomplished that unwholesome action in later present  life;  or  that  being  had  accomplished  wrong  belief  which  is  able  to  produce  it’s consequence completely at moribund period. After death that being, therefore, has to reach hell realm, where any happiness, even as much as mist, is absent, which is destination of vicious persons, which is the place with dissociation in disorder but not desire to fall. ***(M-3- 257)*** 

In ***Mahā kammavibhanga Sutta***, ***Uparipaņņāsa***, the Exalted One had preached how volitions of impulsion which arise together with either wrong view or right view that had been cultivated in order to be able to produce it’s consequence completely during lying on bed for moribund person, give rise to produce ***paţisandhi*** consequence in this way etc. 

Then either wrong view or right view can not be cultivated in order to be able to produce  it’s  consequence  through  weak  impulsions  of  fivefold  doors.  The  commentator Sayadaw, he himself, explained in commentary called ***Abhidhammā ñāņavibhanga (Abhi-A- 2-388)*** as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-166** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

It  is  right.\_\_\_\_\_  All  these  functions,  from  the beginning  of  knowing  wholesome, unwholesome ***dhammas*** to the end, death, can be occurred through consciousness of mind- door cognitive process only, but not through that of fivefold doors and then consciousness of fivefold-doors cognitive processes which arise together with impulsions should be rejected to 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE16

performing all these functions, from the beginning of knowing wholesome, unwholesome ***dhammas*** to the end, death. 

It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ In that commentary also, it is explained that “neither wholesome ***dhamma*** nor unwholesome ***dhamma*** can be realized by consciousness of fivefold cognitive process etc., through beginning as “***manopubbangamā*** ***dhammā***” etc. Wholesome ***dhammas*** are  accomplished  through  wise  attention  called  ***yonisomanasikāra***  while  unwholesome ***dhamma***, through unwise attention. Those wholesome and unwholesome ***dhammas*** have got efficiency which can accomplish their consequence. 

That efficiency of action (***kamma***), if it is real productable to consequence, any one of three  objects,  action,  emblem  of  action,  emblem  of destination,  will  appear  in  (6)  doors appropriately through that efficiency of action at moribund period. The ***paţisandhi*** arises by taking that object for new coming-into-existence. Either agreeable feeling or disagreeable feeling always follows with the continuity of corporeality-mentality which continue to arise after that ***paţisandhi***, due to presence of efficiency such wholesome ***dhamma***, unwholesome ***dhamma***  to produce  its  consequence  apparently  again.  That  kind  of  occurrence  of  those wholesome and unwholesome ***dhammas*** is already rejected in fivefold doors. Observing of wholesome action, unwholesome actions are also rejected in fivefold doors similarly. The righteous one who has got Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition can know and see that  nature  of  efficiency  of  wholesome  and  unwholesome  ***dhammas***  to  produce  its consequence with the help of experiential right view knowledge, if he discerns by knowledge again. Realization  by knowledge again in that way can be achieved by impulsions of mind- door-cognitive process only. Realization by knowledge again through impulsions of fivefold doors has been already rejected. It should be recognized in this way. ***(Mūlaţī-2-106, Anuţī-2- 116)*** It means that as realization of wholesome action and unwholesome action again through impulsions  of  fivefold  doors-cognitive  processes  has  been  rejected,  accomplishment  of wholesome action and unwholesome action through impulsions of fivefold-doors cognitive processes also should be rejected. 

If  all  kinds  of  consciousness,  including  impulsions  of  fivefold-doors-cognitive processes are rejected for performing functions mentioned above, how processes of death and ***paţisandhi*** can arise in those fivefold doors? 

The answer is that\_\_\_\_\_ During fivefold-doors cognitive process adjacent to death, the  death-consciousness  arises  contiguously  after  registering  and  ***paţisandhi***  arises contiguously after that death-consciousness in the mind-door. Those death-consciousness and ***paţisandhi*** consciousness are not inclusive in consciousness of cognitive process including impulsions. With regarding to this meaning, during showing this object of ***paţisandhi*** the commentary  explained  both  death-consciousness  that  arises  contiguously  after  registering that  arises  in  fivefold  doors,  and  ***paţisandhi***  that  arises  contiguously  after  that  death- consciousness. It should be recognized in this way. (With regarding to these words “***imina adhippayena*** = with regarding to this meaning”, the term, ***manodvārikajavana***, does not mean true mind-door but it shows only those consciousness which are free from doors called ***dvāra vimutta***.) ***(Mūlaţī-2-106) (See Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

**PAGE-167** 

During showing object of that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness with referring to ***paţisandhi*** which arises by taking some objects, visible-object etc., with the life –span of remaining (5) mind-moments after death-consciousness falls it was preached in ***Paţţhāna*** as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Abhi-9-428)*** 
PAGE15

The consciousness of ***paţisandhi*** with the object, present (emblem of action) ***dhamma*** is capable of benefiting for arising of the life-continuum with the object, present (emblem of action) ***dhamma*** by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity ***(amantara paccaya)***. ***(Abhi- 9-428)*** 

Furthermore with referring to ***paţisandhi*** which arises by taking some objects, visible- object etc., with the life-span of remaining one mind moment only it was also preached that – ***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** /***(Abhi-9-427)*** 

The consciousness of ***paţisandhi*** with the object, present (emblem of action) ***dhamma*** is capable of benefiting for arising of the life-continuum with the object, past (emblem of action) ***dhamma*** by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity. ***(Abhi-9-427)*** It should be recognized it was worth preaching in this way. ***(Mūlaţī-2-106, 107)*** 

7. **From woeful existence to joyful existence** 

In the next kind\_\_\_\_\_ A being is existing in any kind of woeful existences. If that being is existing in animal being  as elephants  called ***Pālileyyaka, Chaddanta***, it has got opportunity to do wholesome actions which are free from faults in that woeful existence also. Therefore in the continuum of the being who is existing in woeful existence, who has got well accomplished wholesome action which is free from faults, at moribund period \_\_\_\_\_ either   1. that wholesome action or 

\2. object of wholesome action = emblem of action reaches to impinge in the mind-

door as mentioned above. At the time which is contiguous after either impulsions of cognitive process  with  registering  as  end,  which  arise by  taking  that  object  of  action  or  object  of emblem  of  action,  or  pure  impulsions  of  cognitive  process  without  registering,  death- consciousness arise by  taking object of the life-continuum. 

By  the  time  just  after  cessation  of  that  death-consciousness  the  ***paţisandhi*** consciousness which is inclusive in joyful existence arises by taking object of either that action or emblem of action, which impinges into the mind-door at moribund moment through inclining efficiency of defilements, ignorance, craving etc., which are not eradicated by the Noble  Path  ***dhamma***.  This  is  the  ***paţisandhi***  with  object  of  past  ***dhamma***  which  arises contiguously after death-consciousness with object of past ***dhamma***. ***(Abhi-A-2-150)*** 

**PAGE-168** 

In the continuum of another being who is existing in any kinds of woeful existences either emblem of joyful destination (***sugatinimitta***) which can be said colour of mother’s womb with red woolen rug colour for the being who is future mankind or emblem of joyful destination which can be said colour of garden, edifice, the tree of plenty (comparable to the mythical  cornucopia)  etc.,  which  will  be  used  by  himself  for  the  being  who  has  future coming-into-existence as heavenly one (***deva***), appears in the mind-door. After cessation of two times of life-continuum three kinds of consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process, 

1) one time of mind-door-adverting, 
1) five times of impulsions, due to presence of weak efficacy at the period adjacent to death, 
1) two kinds of registering, 

arise successively by taking object of that emblem of destination in the continuum of that  woeful  being  who  is  going  to  joyful  coming-into-existence.  Afterwards  one  death- consciousness arises by taking object of life-continuum. Thus (11) times of mind-moments have passed through so far as this extent of continuity of mind moments. Then ***paţisandhi*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE18

consciousness arises by taking that object of emblem of destination which has the life span of remaining five mind moments. 

In  the  continuum  of  another  being  who  is  also  existing  in  any  kind  of  woeful existences an object which is the factor of arising of lust etc., appears in any kind of fivefold doors during lying down on the bed at moribund period. In the continuum of that woeful being five times of impulsions, due to presence of weak efficacy at the period adjacent to death, and two times of registering arise successively at the end of determining consciousness which occurs within such continuity of consciousness of cognitive process. Afterwards – one death-consciousness arises by taking object of life-continuum. 

Thus (15) times of mind moments, i.e., (2) times of life-continuum, 

1. (1) time of five-doors-adverting, 
1. (1) time of seeing-consciousness, 
1. (1) time of receiving, 
1. (1) time of investigating, 
1. (1) time of determining, 
1. (5) times of impulsions, 
1. (2) times of registering, 

…. (1) time of death-consciousness, 

have  passed  successively.  Then  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  which  is  inclusive  in  joyful existence arises by taking that object of emblem of joyful destination which has the life span of remaining one mind moment. This kind of ***paţisandhi*** is joyful ***paţisandhi*** with present ***dhamma***, which arises contiguously after death-consciousness with past ***dhamma*** only. 

**PAGE-169** 

[It  is  natural  fixed  law  that  those  objects  of  ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum,  death- consciousness are the same as each other within one existence. The death-consciousness, therefore,  takes  only  object  of  life-continuum  of  that  woeful  existence  but  not  object  of emblem of destination which appears at moribund period.] 

These phenomena are how two kinds of ***paţisandhi***, viz., 

1. ***paţisandhi*** of joyful existence, which takes object of past ***dhamma***, 
1. ***paţisandhi*** of joyful existence, which takes object of present ***dhamma***, 

arise  contiguously  after  death-consciousness  of  woeful  existence,  which  has  got object of past ***dhamma***. ***(Abhi-A-2-150)*** 

It should be recognized separately on ***paţisandhi*** with past object by means of object of action and object of emblem of action; on ***paţisandhi*** with present object by means of emblem of joyful destination, colour of mother’s womb etc. (***Mahāţī-2-301***) 

8. **Object of life-continuum (*bhavanga*)** 

The object of life-continuum of that being who is existing in woeful existence is the object which had been taken as object by impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness before attaining that woeful existence. Then those words, “before attaining that woeful existence”, means joyful existence for the person who reached into that woeful existence from joyful existence  while  that  woeful  existence  for  the  person  who  reached  into  present  woeful existence from that previous woeful existence. 

It will be explicit again. Joyful existence is present one for the person who reached into joyful existence from woeful existence which is the first previous life. Those objects of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum-death-consciousness of that first previous woeful existence were 
PAGE17

the object which was taken by impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness of second previous life. The object of present joyful existence ***paţisandhi***, in other words, objects of present joyful  existence  ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum,  death-consciousness  are  object  of  joyful destination which was taken by impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness of first previous woeful existence. (It should be recognized similarly on objects of action and emblem of action.) 

9. **From joyful existence to joyful one** 

In the next kind\_\_\_\_\_ due to presence of the preaching of the Supreme Buddha in a way that “***tānissa tamhi samaye olambanti*** = as shape of peak of mountain appears at east side of it through efficiency of sunshine which is shinning west side of it at evening those wholesome actions (***kamma***) which had been done either in this present life or successive lives previously) appear in the mind-door of the person who is existing in joyful existence at moribund period (M-1-203), while the person who has got wholesome actions, who exists in sensual joyful existence, is lying down on the bed at moribund moment either such  

1. object of wholesome action which is free from faults, or 
1. object of emblem of that wholesome action called ***kammanimitta*** which had been cultivated previously, 

appears in the mind-door. That object of either action or emblem of action can appear in the mind-door of only the person who has got well cultivated sensual wholesome actions. 

**PAGE-170** 

In the next kind – only object of emblem of action can appear in the mind-door of the person who has got well cultivated lofty wholesome actions (=who has got wholesome action of absorption apparently, due to presence of acquired absorption). (It is because there is only object of emblem of action certainly for lofty consequence ***dhamma***.) ***(Abhi-A-2-150)*** 

For example – a ***meditator*** has developed superiorly  fourth absorption of mindfulness of  breathing,  which  is  surrounded  by  ignorance-craving-clinging  with  heartfelt  desire  to become *brahma’s* existence. The object of that fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing is very brilliant sign of full concentration called ***paţibhāga*** ***nimitta***. That fourth absorption of mindfulness of breathing is the lofty action (***mahaggata*** ***kamma***) of which object of sign of full concentration is called emblem of action. 

If  a  practicing  ***meditator***  develops  superiorly  fourth  absorption  of  white  ***kāsiņa***- object, which is surrounded by ignorance-craving-clinging with heartfelt desire to become *brahma’s*  existence,  the  object  of  that  fourth  absorption  of  white  ***kasiņa***-object  is  very brilliant white sign of full concentration which is also called emblem of action. It should be understood in this way.  

If  a  person  will  reach  to  *brahma*  world  certainly,  due  to  presence  of  absorption without falling back to moribund period, only object of emblem of action which is object of lofty action appears in the mind-door of the person with well cultivated lofty wholesome action, without appearance of object of lofty wholesome action. 

In the continuum of a being who had got sensual wholesome actions which had been well cultivated in either present life or successive previous lives, the death-consciousness arises by taking object of life-continuum contiguously after impulsions of cognitive process which is adjacent to death-consciousness, which is ended with registering which arises by taking object of either action or emblem of action, while in the continuum of a being who had got well cultivated lofty wholesome action, the death consciousness arises by taking object of life-continuum contiguously after either impulsions of cognitive process which is adjacent to 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE20

death-consciousness,  which  is  ended  with  registering  which  arises  by  taking  object  of emblem of that action or pure impulsions of cognitive process which is adjacent to death- consciousness without registering. After cessation of that death-consciousness the ***paţisandhi*** consciousness  which  is  inclusive  in  joyful  existence  inclined  by  means  of  efficiency  of ignorance, craving etc., which has not eradicated by the Noble Path, arises by taking object of either that action or that emblem of action. This is the kind of ***paţisandhi*** with either 

1. object of past ***dhamma*** or 
1. object of concept which is not worth designating as past or present ***dhamma***, which arises contiguously after death-consciousness with object of past ***dhamma***. ***(Abhi-A- 2-150)*** 

PAGE-171 

***Upacāra*** (access) – That mind-door cognitive process adjacent to death which has object of lofty  emblem  of  action  should  be  recognized  as  ***upacāra***  (access)  of  lofty  consequence ***paţisandhi***.  This  is  because  that  mind-door  cognitive  process  adjacent  to  death  has  both occurrence of the same object and causal emblem of lofty ***paţisandhi*** which will arise later. If mind-door cognitive process adjacent to death takes object of sign of full concentration of mindfulness of breathing, lofty ***paţisandhi*** of new existence also takes object of that sign. If the former takes object of full concentration of white ***kasiņa***, the latter takes object of that sign similarly. It should be understood in this way. ***(Mūlaţī-2-107, Anuţī-2-116)*** ***Mahaggatāvasānam***\_\_\_\_\_ Some teachers, such as Venerable ***Dhammasiri Thero*** etc., said that that mind-door cognitive process adjacent to death has got the end of lofty impulsions. In the continuum of a person who emerges from lofty absorption after entering lofty absorption appropriately  that  mind-door  cognitive  process  adjacent  to  death  arises  and  then  death- consciousness falls successively, resulting in designating on that cognitive process as the cognitive process with loft impulsion as end ***(mahaggatavasānam)***. ***(Mūlaţī-2-107, Anuţī-2- 116, 117)*** 

Venerable  ***Dhammasiri  Thero***  had  an  opinion  that  mind-door-cognitive  process adjacent to death falls after cognitive process of absorption while ***Mūlaţī***ka Sayadaw had an opinion that other mind-door cognitive processes can arise between those cognitive processes appropriately. 

***navatabbārammaņa\_\_\_\_\_*** These words, “object of concept which is not worth designating as past or present ***dhamma***”, were explained with referring to both fine-material ***paţisandhi*** and ***paţisandhi***  of  boundless  space  and  emptiness  sphere  for  immaterial  ***paţisandhi***  in  the commentary. Those kinds of ***paţisandhi*** of boundless consciousness and neither-perception- nor-non-perception  are  counted inclusively in the words,  “***paţisandhi*** with object of past ***dhamma***”. ***(Mahāţī-2-382)*** 

According to explanations of above commentary\_\_\_\_\_  it should be recognized there are  

1. (11) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1. (7) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** wit object of concept which is not worth designating as past or present ***dhamma***. 

These (11) kinds of ***paţisandhi***, viz., 

1) great wholesome consequence ***paţisandhi*** ………..    (8) kinds, 
1) wholesome consequence, neutrality investigating ***paţisandhi***…….. (1) kind 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of boundless consciousness………….    (1) kind 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of neither-perception-nor-non-perception ……    (1) kind,  
PAGE19

are ***paţisandhi*** with objects of past ***dhammas***. **PAGE-172** 

These (7) kinds of ***paţisandhi***, viz, 

1) fine-material ***paţisandhi*** …………..  (5) kinds (pentad method), 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of boundless space …….  (1) kind, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of emptiness sphere ……   (1) kind,  

are ***paţisandhi*** with objects of concepts which are not worth designating as past or  present ***dhamma***. (***Mūlaţī***-2-107) (Those kinds of ***paţisandhi***, i.e., ***paţisandhi*** with object of present ***dhamma*** and ***paţisandhi*** of woeful destination will be explained in later.) 

10. ***Paţisandhi* which takes object of present *dhamma*** 

In the continuum of another being, the visible object, emblem of joyful destination, which can be said either colour of the mother’s womb for human being or colour of garden, edific, the tree of plenty etc., for heavenly being, appears in the mind door at moribund period by means of sensual wholesome action which lacks faults. 

After cessation of two times of life continuums in the continuum of that being three kinds of consciousness of mind-door cognitive process, i.e., 

1. mind-door-adverting. ……….    (1) time 
1. due to presence of weak efficacy at the period adjacent to death, impulsions adjacent to death consciousness………..  (5) times, 
1. registering …………………….  (2) times, 

arise successively by taking that object of emblem of joyful destination. Afterwards one time of death-consciousness arises by taking object of life-continuum. Thus (11) times of mind-moments have passed through so far as this extent of continuity of mind-moments. Then ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises by taking that object of emblem of destination only, which has the life-span of remaining five mind-moments. This is the ***paţisandhi*** with object of present ***dhamma*** which arises contiguously after death-consciousness with object of past ***dhamma***. ***(Abhi-A-2-151)*** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** ***(Mahāţī-2-302)*** 

In  commentaries  it  is  found  that  only  visible-object,  colour  can  be  occurred  as emblem of destination, such as “***mātukucchivaņņa sańkhāta*** = emblem of joyful destination which can be called colour of mother’s womb” etc. It is suitable reason in commentaries that audible  object,  sound,  can  not  be  occurred  as  emblem  of  destination  because  it  is  not corporeality produced by ***kamma***, which is obsessed by craving-wrong view in a way that “I, mine, my resultant ***dhamma***” etc., (= it is produced by mind and temperature only), resulting in including in joyful existence. It should be investigated the fact why olfactory-object etc., can not be found as emblem of destination. ***(Mahāţī-2-302)*** 

**PAGE-173** 

Relatives said moribund being (especially mankind that “my friend… these offerings are worth worshipping to the Supreme Buddha, you have to purify your mind” and then they bring any object of various kinds, such as 

1. visible-objects, garland, pennant, bent bamboo stick tied to a flagstaff etc., or 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE22

2. audible-objects, listening ***dhamma***, worshipping by playing musical instruments etc., or 
2. olfactory-objects, varieties of fume, lingering fragrance, scent etc., or 
2. sapid-objects, varieties of honey, molasses after saying in this way that “my friend… lick and take pleasure this honey, this is deserving to offer for you”….; or 
2. tactile-object, varieties of clothes made in ***cina*** division, ***somāra*** division etc., after saying in this way that “my friend… touch these clothes, these are deserving to offer for you”,  

towards fivefold doors accordingly. 

In the continuum of that being, due to weak efficacy at moribund period, (5) times of impulsions adjacent to death and (2) times of registering arise at the end of determining which arises within continuity of such such cognitive process, eye-door-cognitive process etc.,  by  taking  object,  those  visible  object  etc.,  that  comes  to  impinge  respective  door. Afterwards one death-consciousness arises by taking object of life-continuum (= any one of objects of action, emblem of action, emblem of destination). Then ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises contiguously by taking object of those impulsions adjacent to death, which has the life- span of remaining one mind-moment only. This kind of ***paţisandhi*** is the ***paţisandhi*** with object of present ***dhamma*** which arises contiguously after death-consciousness with object of past ***dhamma***. ***(Abhi-A-2-151)*** 

**5.11Object of action of *vipassanā* =** ***kammanimitta*** 

A righteous has got Knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality and Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition. That righteous ***meditator*** performs ***vipassanā*** practice through alternate discerning on those conditioned things as 

1. ***anicca***, after seeing nature of arising and perishing away, 
1. ***dukkha***, after seeing nature of being oppressed by incessant phenomena of arising and perishing away, 
1. ***anatta***, after seeing nature of absence of ‘self’ called ‘***atta***’ which is indestructible essence of durable one existing forever. 

In accordance with ***Cetanā Sutta*** mentioned above, those ***vipassanā*** action has got opportunity  to  produce  its  consequence  for  a  person  with  underlying  tendency  element because another kinds of actions have not got opportunity to produce consequence. 

**PAGE-174** 

At  that  time  ***vipassanā***  actions  which  take  object  of  any  kind  of  nature  of impermanence,  suffering,  non-self  of  those  conditioned  things,  occur  continuously  in  the continuum of that righteous ***meditator*** who is lying down on the bed at moribund period. If impulsions adjacent to death can take object of any kind of nature, ***anicca*** or ***dukkha*** or ***anatta*** of those conditioned things, that object of impulsions adjacent to death can be present object of emblem of action which appears in the mind-door. In this case the emblem of action means object of volitions of ***vipassanā*** impulsions. It if present ideational-object of emblem of action (***paccuppanna dhammārammaņakamma nimitta***). Thus (6) kinds of objects can arise as present emblem of action in (6) doors accordingly. At that time ***paţisandhi*** of new coming-into-existence and successive first life-continuum etc., can have present object of emblem of action. When that present object of emblem of action finishes its life span at ***paţisandhi*** mind moment ***paţisandhi*** of new coming-into-existence takes present object of emblem of action while every life-continuum after ***paţisandhi*** takes object of past ***dhamma*** of emblem of action. 
PAGE21

**Worshipping the Supreme Buddha**\_\_\_\_\_ In above commentary, in these words “***ayam tāta tavatthāya buddhapūjā karīyati*** = my friend ….these offerings are worth worshipping to the Supreme Buddha” etc,  wholesome deed can be occurred by  means of preceding volition (***pubbacetanā***) which arises previously before impulsions adjacent to death fall. The definite action (***janaka*** ***kamma***) which has efficiency to produce ***paţisandhi*** consequence in new coming-into-existence by means of preceding volition called ***pubbacetanā***. Those volitions of impulsions adjacent to death, actually, are not wholesome deeds which are definite actions. However noble teachers said that wholesome deed can arise by means of wholesome volition of  seventh  impulsion  which  is  inclusive  in  last  mind-door-cognitive  process  before impulsions adjacent to death. (These noble teachers do not reject occurrence of wholesome deed (= definite action) by means of preceding volitions which are occurring in previous impulsions. It should be recognized the fact noble teachers said definite action can arise by means of volition of seventh impulsion of last mind-door cognitive process before cognitive process adjacent to death.) ***(Mahāţī-2-302)*** 

12. **Form  fine-material  sphere  to  sensual  joyful  existences,  fine-material  sphere, immaterial sphere** 

For  the  next  kind\_\_\_\_\_  in  the  continuum  of  another  being,  due  to  presence  of acquired lofty absorptions through objects of the earth-***kasiņa***, the white-***kasiņa*** etc., (=due to presence  of  acquired  all  ‘8’kinds  of  attainments),  while  he  is  existing  in  fine-material existence, any kind of these three objects, 

1. sensual wholesome action (= it will produce its consequence), 
1. object of that sensual wholesome action = emblem of action, 
1. emblem of destination called joyful destination,  

appears in the mind-door at moribund period, if he will go and exist in the sensual joyful existences. 

**PAGE-175** 

If  the  person  will  be  born  as  spontaneous  ***paţisandhi***  in  fine-material  spheres, boundless space sphere and emptiness sphere, object of emblem of action, i.e., the earth- ***kasiņa***, the white-***kasiņa*** etc., will appear in mind-door. [Objects of emblems of action called concept of space and concept of emptiness will appear in the mind-door for the persons who will be born  as  spontaneous ***paţisandhi***  in boundless  space  sphere  and  emptiness  sphere respectively.] 

If  the  person  will  be  born  as  spontaneous  ***paţisandhi***  in  boundless  consciousness sphere,  the  lofty  consciousness  called  object  of  boundless  space  wholesome  action  will appear in mind-door. 

If the person will be born as spontaneous ***paţisandhi*** in neither-perception-nor-non- perception, the lofty consciousness called object of emptiness wholesome action will appear in mind-door. 

[In the continuum of *brahma* existing in fine-material sphere who will be born as ***paţisandhi*** in sensual joyful existences the objects of action which appear in mind-door at moribund  period  might  be  not  only  the  wholesome  volitions  which  are  designated  as preliminary, access, adaptation, trans-lineage which are inclusive in the foremost absorption cognitive process (***ādikammikajhānavīthi***), absorption cognitive processes, and volitions of great  wholesome  impulsions  of  mind  door  cognitive  process  which  are  occurring  during endeavouring those foremost absorption cognitive process and absorption cognitive process 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE24

through various objects of ***samatha*** practice, the earth-***kasiņa***, the white-***kasiņa*** etc. Volitions of great wholesome impulsions of mind door cognitive process, which arise after eye-door cognitive  process,  ear-door-cognitive  process,  which  had  been  cultivated  in  fine-material sphere, which will be presented can also occur as object of action. Those sensual wholesome actions which had been cultivated before reaching into the fine material sphere can also occur as object of action. It should be understood in this way etc.] 

(Any kind of object of action-emblem of action-emblem of destination appear not only in the mind-door as mentioned above) but superior desirable object which is factor of occurrence of wholesome action, also appear into any door randomly among eye-door, ear- door etc. (It should be recognized if that superior desirable object is visible-object, it will appear in eye-door and mind-door; if it is audible-object, it will appear in ear-door and mind- door respectively.) 

In the continuum of that fine-material being, (5) times of impulsions adjacent to death arise at the end of determining consciousness which arises within continuity of consciousness of cognitive process called such such eye-door cognitive process, ear-door cognitive process, due to presence of weak efficacy at moribund period. It is impossible to fall registering for those persons existing in lofty existence (who are not sensual existence in which sensual impulsion, sensual object only arise, resulting in possibility to fall registering). Therefore one death-consciousness arises contiguously after impulsions adjacent to death by taking object of life-continuum. At the end of that death-consciousness the ***paţisandhi*** consciousness with any kind of objects which appear at moribund period through such such action which is inclusive in sensual joyful destination, lofty joyful destination arises contiguously. 

**PAGE-176** 

(It means any kind of ***paţisandhi*** among sensual joyful destination ***paţisandhi***, fine- material ***paţisandhi***, immaterial ***paţisandhi***, arises by taking object of impulsions adjacent to death in accordance with action.) 

This kind of ***paţisandhi*** is the ***paţisandhi*** with any random kind of object among past object, present object, object of concept, which arises contiguously after fine-material death- consciousness with object of concept which is not deserving to designate as past, present. ***(Ahbi-A-2-151)*** 

***“upacita  mahaggata  kammassa  pana  kammanimittameva  āpāthamāgacchati.” (Abhi-A-2-150)*** 

In  the  continuum  of  the  person  who  has  still  got  absorption  wholesome  action apparently only object of emblem of action appears at moribund period (if he will attain ***paţisandhi*** of fine-material sphere certainly), due to presence of acquired cultivated lofty wholesome action of absorption. The object of emblem of action (= object of fine-material wholesome action) means object of concept of ***kasiņa***, sign of full concentration of earth- ***kasiņa*** etc. Those consciousness, ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death of fine-material being takes that object of concept only. Therefore it is said fine-material death-consciousness with object of conceptual ***dhamma***. 

13. **From immaterial sphere to immaterial sphere, sensual joyful existences** 

It is impossible to arise fine-material ***paţisandhi*** contiguous after death-consciousness of immaterial sphere. Among four kinds of immaterial existences ***paţisandhi*** of successive lower kind can not arise contiguously after death-consciousness of successive upper kind. Therefore fine-material ***paţisandhi*** with object of emblem of action of concept can not arise contiguously after death-consciousness of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. Therefore 
PAGE23

either ***paţisandhi*** of neither-perception-nor-non-perception with object of past ***dhamma*** or ***paţisandhi***  of  sensual  joyful  existence  with  object  of  past  ***dhamma***,  object  of  present ***dhamma*** are worth yoking at the mind moment contiguous after death-consciousness of that neither-perception-nor-non-perception. ***(Mūlaţī-2-107)*** 

***āruppa cutiyā honti, heţţhimāruppa vajjitā.*** 

***pathamāruppa sandhī ca, tathā kāmatihetukā.***  

***(Abhidhammattha sangaha)*** 

Due to presence of saying that successive lower kind of immaterial ***paţisandhi*** can not arise contiguously after death-consciousness of immaterial existences, when an immaterial being passes away he can be born in the same sphere again or successive upper sphere also. He  can  take  ***paţisandhi***  with  three  roots  in  (7)  kinds  of  sensual  joyful  existences  also. According  to  these  explanations  it  can  be  recognized  in  brief  as  follows:  --  Because boundless  space  ***paţisandhi***  takes  object  of  concept  of  space,  death-consciousness  of boundless space also takes that object of concept of space. At the moment contiguous after death-consciousness  of  boundless  space  with  object  of  concept  of  space  –  any  one  of ***paţisandhi*** among these (8) kinds, viz., 

1. boundless space ***paţisandhi*** with object of concept of space, 
1. ***paţisandhi***  of  boundless  consciousness  sphere,  which  takes  object  of  past consciousness of boundless space, 
1. ***paţisandhi*** of emptiness sphere which takes object of absence nature of consciousness boundless space, 
1. ***paţisandhi***  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  which  takes  object  of  past consciousness of emptiness sphere, 
1. four kinds of sensual ***paţisandhi*** with three roots which take object of any one of three kinds  called  action-emblem  of  action-emblem  of  destination  which  are  worth designating as past, present, concept appropriately, 

can arise continuously.  

**PAGE-177** 

At  the  moment  contiguous  after  death-consciousness  of  boundless  consciousness sphere which has object of past object of consciousness of boundless space, any one of (7) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** as mentioned above (8) kinds, excluding ***paţisandhi*** of boundless space sphere can arise continuously. 

After  the  moment  contiguous  after  death-consciousness  of  emptiness  sphere  with object of concept of emptiness, any one of (6) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** as mentioned above (7) kinds, excluding ***paţisandhi*** of boundless consciousness sphere, can arise continuously. 

At the moment contiguous after death-consciousness of neither-perception-nor-non- perception, which has past object of consciousness of emptiness, any one of (5) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** which are one kind of ***paţisandhi*** of neither perception-nor-non-perception and four kinds of sensual ***paţisandhi*** with three roots, can arise continuously. 

These are showing nature of ***paţisandhi*** with past ***dhamma***, conceptual ***dhamma***, present  ***dhamma***  which  arise  contiguous  after  death-consciousness  of  immaterial  joyful existences with object of past ***dhamma***,conceptual ***dhamma***. ***(Abhi-A-2-151)*** 

***Uparupari āruppā, na āyūhanti heţţhimam. balittācupacārassa, tihetukāva yoniyo.*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE26

When  one  reaches  into  successive  upper  immaterial  spheres  successive  lower immaterial absorptions and fine-material absorptions, which had been acquired in previous existences,  become  extinguished  consequently.  Those  beings  of  immaterial  sphere  never endeavour successive lower absorptions of any kind because of lack of fundamental lower absorptions, resulting from the condition to attain present sphere in a way that the absorption of boundless space can be attained basing on fine-material absorptions and absorption of boundless  consciousness  can  be  attained  basing  on  absorption  of  boundless  space.  It  is possible to attain both absorption of present existing sphere and successive upper absorption through basing on that acquired absorption. Immaterial *brahma*s are, therefore, possible to attain ***paţisandhi*** of both present existing sphere and successive upper immaterial sphere. Unless new kind of absorption is available (= unless either acquired absorption or successive upper absorption is available), sensual practices, which can be said access absorptions, which arise  before  present  immaterial  absorption  are  available.  That  sensual  practice  is  very powerful  excellent  sensual  wholesome  action  with  three  roots.  In  the  continuum  of  that immaterial *brahma* there is no sensual wholesome action which is better than those access practice of wholesome action. Due to presence of that sensual access practice of wholesome action,  he  has  got  ***paţisandhi***  of  any  sphere  of  (7)  kinds  of  sensual  joyful  existences consequently. ***(See Mūlaţī-2-109)*** 

***vehapphale akaniţţhe, bhavagge ca patiţţhitā. na punāññattha jāyanti, sabbe ariyapuggalā. na punatattha jāyanti, sabbepi suddhavāsika. brahmalokagatā heţţhā, ariyā nopapajjare.*** 

**PAGE-178** 

Above  words,  which  show  how  various  kinds  of  ***paţisandhi***  arise  after  death consciousness of immaterial beings, are explanations by which both worldling persons and Noble Ones are shown minglingly. If Noble Ones reach into immaterial sphere, they never return back to sensual sphere even though they were upstream-enterer and Once-returnee. Those persons are called ***jhāna anāgāmī*** (= non-returnees who never return back to sensual sphere, due to presence of absorption). After they reached into successive upper spheres they never take ***paţisandhi*** in successive lower spheres. 

14. **No one has got twice experiences in *Suddhāvāsa*; It is no false final existing person in *Akanittha* (the Highest Realm)** 

Furthermore there are three kinds of realms called ***bhūmisīsa*** (apex of realms) i.e., ***vehapphala*** (Great Reward), ***akaniţţha*** (the Highest Realm), ***nevasaññā nā saññā yatana*** (neither-perception-nor-non-perception). Among those realms, Great Reward Realm is the apex one in all realms, except ***Suddhāvāsa*** (Realms of Pure Abodes). The Highest Realm is the  apex  one  in  five  Realms  of  Pure  Abodes.  The  realm  of  neither-perception-nor-non- perception is the apex of realms of immaterial sphere. Those Noble-Ones who exist in those three kinds of apex of realms never take ***paţisandhi*** in another realm. Unless those Noble- Ones who live in both the Great Reward Realm and realm of neither-perception-nor-non- perception  attain  the  Noble  Fruit-Knowledge  of  Arahant,  they  will  exist  their  respective realm again. However those Noble-Ones called Non-returnees who live in the Highest Realm never take ***paţisandhi*** again in either the same realm or other ones. They become Arahants certainly in that Highest Realm only. Unless those Non-returnees who live in lower (4) Pure Abodes attain the Noble Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant, they never take ***paţisandhi*** again in the same realm but transfer to successive upper realms of Pure Abodes. No one has got twice 
PAGE25

experiences in each realm of Pure Abodes, It is no false final existing person but only rue person with final existence (***pacchimabhavika***) in the Highest Realm. Therefore olden day noble teachers had made adage that “no one has got twice experience in ***Suddhāvāsa***; it is no false final existing person in ***Akaniţţha***”. 

15. **Kinds of death-consciousness and *paţisandhi* in total** 

***dvivipañcappakārā ca, pañcāţţha duvidhapi ca. catuvisati sabbāpi, tāhonti paţisandhiyo. (Mūlaţī-2-107)*** 

If It is counted collectively by means of objects as mentioned above, numbers of kinds of ***paţisandhi*** are as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. At the moment contiguous after death-consciousness of sensual joyful existence with object of past ***dhamma*** 
   1) ***paţisandhi*** of woeful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
   1) ***paţisandhi*** of woeful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, (two) 
1. At the moment contiguous after death-consciousness of sensual woeful existence with object of past ***dhamma*** 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, (two) 

**PAGE-179** 

3. At the moment contiguous after death-consciousness of sensual joyful existence with object of past ***dhamma*** 
   1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
   1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, (two) 
   1) ***paţisandhi*** of fine-material sphere with object of concept, 
   1) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of past ***dhamma***, 
   1) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of concept (five) 
3. At  the  moment  contiguous  after  death-consciousness  of  fine-material  sphere  with object of concept, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, (two) 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of fine-material sphere with object of concept, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of concept (five) 
5. At  the  moment  contiguous  after  death-consciousness  of  fine-material  sphere  with object  of  concept,  boundless  space  sphere  with  concept  of  space,  and  that  of emptiness sphere with concept of emptiness\_\_\_\_\_ 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, (two) 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of concept, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of past ***dhamma***, 
6. At  the  moment  contiguous  after  death-consciousness  of  fine-material  sphere  with object of concept, boundless consciousness sphere with object of past ***dhamma*** called consciousness of boundless space and that of neither-perception-nor-non-perception with object of past ***dhamma*** called consciousness of emptiness sphere\_\_\_\_\_ 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of joyful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, (two) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE28

3) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of concept, 
3) ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of past ***dhamma***, 

Thus there are (8) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** after death-consciousness of immaterial sphere. (8) 

[**Notes**:\_\_\_\_\_ Although two kinds of ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere which take objects of past ***dhamma*** and concept can arise contiguous after death-consciousness of boundless space sphere, only one kind of ***paţisandhi*** of neither-perception-nor-non-perception with object of past ***dhamma*** can arise contiguous after death-consciousness of neither-perception-nor-non- perception. It is said collectively, due to presence of object of the same kind of past ***dhamma*** to which each death-consciousness takes object respectively. As mentioned above ***paţisandhi*** of sensual joyful destination can arise after those two kinds of death-consciousness.] 

7. At the moment contiguous after death-consciousness of sensual woeful existence with object of past ***dhamma*** 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of woeful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1) ***paţisandhi*** of woeful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, (two) 

**PAGE-180** 

There are (24) kinds of ***paţisandhi*** in total by means of objects. Among those kinds, two  kinds  of  ***paţisandhi***  which  arise  contiguous  after  death-consciousness  of  woeful existence are explained in commentary as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

16. **From woeful destination to woeful one** 

Furthermore\_\_\_\_\_  in  the  continuum  of  a  being  existing  in  woeful  existence  with unwholesome actions, any kind of three objects, 

1. that unwholesome action or 
1. object of that unwholesome action = emblem of action or 
1. object of emblem of woeful destination, 

appear in the mind-door at moribund period as mentioned above in similar way. In fivefold-doors the object which is factor of arising of unwholesome appears at moribund period. At that time in the continuum of that being the ***paţisandhi*** consciousness with any random kind of three objects which are inclusive in woeful existence, arises contiguously after death-consciousness which occurs in such continuity of mind moments. This is the nature of arising of two kinds of ***paţisandhi***, i.e.,  

1. ***paţisandhi*** of woeful destination with object of past ***dhamma***, 
1. ***paţisandhi*** of woeful destination with object of present ***dhamma***, 

which arise contiguously after death-consciousness of woeful destination with object of past ***dhamma***. So far as this extent, 20 varieties which are deficit one kind (= 19 kinds) of nature of consciousness which are capable of benefiting function of ***paţisandhi*** (= process of newly occurrence of next existence), life-continuum, death have been shown as the occurrence of ***paţisandhi***. ***(Abhi-A-2-152)*** 

17. **The  relation  of  *nānākkhaņika*  (asynchronous)  and  *upanissaya*  (determinative dependence)** 

When  those  (19)  kinds  of  consequence  consciousness  arise  at  ***paţisandhi***  mind- moment they are produced by action with efficiency of two kinds of relations. It is right. – The Exalted One preached that the definite action (janaka ***kamma***) which can produce such kind of its property, i.e., ***paţisandhi*** consciousness is capable of benefiting for arising of that 
PAGE27

***paţisandhi*** consciousness through efficiency of relations of asynchronous action and natural determinative dependence. 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation (Abhi-1-116) (Abhi-8-147, 150)*** 

Due to occurrence of accomplishment to cultivate sensual wholesome action; due to occurrence of accomplishment to develop over  and over again,  great  consequence  mind- consciousness-element  which  is  associating  with  agreeable  feeling  and  knowledge (***somanassa  sahagata  ñāņasampayutta  mahāvipāka  mano  viññāņadhātu***)  arises  at  such period. (This is evidence of way of benefiting through efficiency of relation of asynchronous action.) 

**PAGE-181** 

Wholesome  action  benefits  for  arising  of  wholesome  consequence  consciousness while unwholesome action benefits for arising of unwholesome consequence consciousness by means of  efficiency of relation of natural determinative dependence. (This is evidence of way of benefiting through efficiency of relation of determinative dependence.) 

18. **Kinds of *paţisandhi*** 

Although only one kind of ***paţisandhi*** is available for a coming-into-existence of one being there were, or, will be various kinds of ***paţisandhi*** of one being for infinite rounds of rebirth from successive past lives to future ones. A being had got experiences to exist various existences  more  or  less  frequent,  except  (5)  realms  of  Pure  Abodes.  Therefore  during discerning on principle of dependent-origination every righteous ***meditator*** has to understand various kinds of ***paţisandhi***. 

Although this consequence consciousness arises as only one kind of ***paţisandhi*** of one coming-into-existence for every being, there are two kinds of ***paţisandhi***, viz., 

1. The ***paţisandhi*** which arises together with corporeality, 
1. The ***paţisandhi*** which arises without associating of corporeality. 

There are three varieties, i.e., sensual existence, fine-material existence, immaterial existence. 

There are four varieties of ***paţisandhi*** through ***yoni*** (= conceptin), viz, 

1. ***aņdajayoni***  = ***paţisandhi*** which develops in the egg shell (= oviparous), 
1. ***jalābujayoni***   = ***paţisandhi*** which develops in the womb (= ovoviviparous and viviparous), 
1. ***samsedajayoni***   = ***paţisandhi*** which develops depending on slime collecting on any surface, moss etc, (= binary fission, asexual reproduction etc.,) 
1. ***opapātikayoni***   = ***paţisandhi*** with spontaneous born as normal matured shape and form. 

There are five varieties of ***paţisandhi*** through ***gati*** (= destination), viz., 

1. ***nirayagati***  = destination of denizen of hell, 
1. ***petagati***  = destination of ghost, 
1. ***tiracchāna gati***   = destination of animal, 
1. ***manussagati***  = destination of mankind, 
1. ***deva gati***  = destination of heavenly beings, *deva, brahma* 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE30

There  are  seven  varieties  of  ***paţisandhi***  through  ***viññāņaţhiti***  (=  existence  with consciousness) and eight varieties through ***sattāvāsa*** (= being’s dwelling place) respectively. (***Abhi-A-2-152***) 

1. In  the  realm  of  mindless  being  with  only  one  aggregate  called  ***ekavokāra***  pure corporeal ***paţisandhi*** called vital ***nonad (jīvitanavaka kalāpa)*** arises. 
1. In  the  four  realms  of  immaterial  sphere  with  only  four  mental  aggregate  called ***catuvokāra*** pure mental ***paţisandhi*** arises. 

**PAGE-182** 

In those (11) realms of sensual sphere and (15) realms of fine-material sphere, which have  got  five  aggregates  called  ***pañcavakāra***  the  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  which  is mixed together with corporeality arises. 

During occurring in that way only ***paţisandhi*** consciousness without sex corporealities called femininity and virility arises in the fine-material sphere. Congenital eunuch’s (***jātipaņdaka***) ***paţisandhi*** also lacks sex-corporealies in sensual sphere in which ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises together with sex-corporeality of any one kind. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  ***paţisandhi***  with  sex-corporeality,  i.e.,  ***paţisandhi***  with femininity  and  ***paţisandhi***  with  virility.  Therefore  if  one  has  got  congenital  eunuch ***paţisandhi***, that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises together with at least two kinds of corporeal units, i.e., base-decad and body-decad; if one has got ***paţisandhi*** with sex-corporeality, that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises together with at least three kinds of corporeal units, i.e., base-decad, body-decad and sex-decad. There is no one who gets less than that number of corporealities. 

19. **Embryo at the moment of conception (*kalala*)** 

As  mentioned  above  when  corporeality  which  arises  together  with  ***paţisandhi*** consciousness in minimum range groups of corporealities, which are occurring at the moment of conception of oviparous, ovoviviparous and viviparous ***paţisandhi***, are called ***kalala*** (the embryo at the moment of conception. The size of embryo at the moment of conception is about the size of clear  oil which adheres on the tip of bodily  hair of  new born  goat or mountain goat with naturally soft hair, which lives in Himalaya Range. That embryo at the moment  of  conception  consists  of  base-decads,  body-decads,  and  sex-decads.  Mental ***dhammas*** led by ***paţisandhi*** consciousness, (if it is joyful ***paţisandhi*** with three roots) 34 kinds of mentalities, arise by depending on heart-base (base corporeality). 

[To be noticed\_\_\_\_\_ Translator’s suggestion – it is repeated explanation found in page 105 paragraph 458, of this volume III.] 

20. **Conception (*yoni*) and destination (*gati*)** 

In this case, it should be understood significance of appropriate yoking of conception and destination whether or not which kind of conception arises in what kind of destination appropriately. 

**PAGE-183** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Mahāţī-2-303) (M-ţī-2-29)*** 
PAGE29

The term, yoni (conception), means ***khandhakoţţhāsa*** (allotment of aggregates). It is not  general  allotment  of  aggregates  only  but  specific  occurrence  of  each  allotment  of aggregate. Process of arising and existing of allotment of aggregates of oviparous animals is different from that of arising and existing of allotment of aggregates of viviparous animals, etc.  Then  each  oviparous  animal  has  specific  kind  of  process  of  arising  and  existing  of allotment of aggregates respectively. They can be classified as fowl family, pheasant family etc.  Although  beings  are  not  mixed  together  naturally  (although  they  have  got  specific allotment of aggregates) they are mixed together through the same process of conception, due to presence of same process of arising and existing of allotment of aggregates. It is, therefore, designated as “***yoni***”. According to the words of sub-commentary it should be recognized specific process of special classified aggregates through place of origin of conception, shell etc., is called ***yoni*** (conception). 

Three kinds of ***yoni*** (conception) i.e., ***aņdaja, jalābuja, samsedaja*** are absent in both destination  of  hell,  destination  of  heavenly  beings  (*deva*  and  *brahmas*),  excluding  the guardian deity of the earth (***bhummadeva***) and a kind of ghost called ***nijjhāmataņhika peta*** who is always burnt. They have only one kind of yoni called spontaneous born (***opapātika***). The ghost called ***nijjhāmataņhika peta*** can not take pregnancy through making love, due to incessant pain with burning fire. 

Those  destinations  of  animal,  ghost  (except  ***nijjhāmataņhika  peta***),  mankind,  the guardian deity of the earth (who is inclusive in destination of *deva*) have all four kinds of yoni, i.e., ***aņdaja, jalābuja, samsedaja, opapātika***. 

In  *brahma*s  of  fine-material  sphere  which  are  inclusive  in  ***opapātika***  yoni (spontaneous born),  excluding *brahma*  called  mindless being,  (30)  kinds  of  corporeaities called eye-decad, ear-decad, base-decad, arise together with ***paţisandhi*** consciousness.  In mindless being only vital nonads corporeal ***dhamma*** occur as ***paţisandhi***. 

In  those  beings  with  both  ***samsedajayoni***  and  ***opapātika  yoni***  (spontaneous  born beings) which are inclusive in sensual joyful destination, excluding *brahma*s of fine-material sphere, maximum range of (70) kinds of corporealities within (7) kinds of corporeal units, viz.,  eye-decad,  ear-decad,  nose-decad,  tongue-decad, body-decad, base-decad,  sex-decad, arise together with ***paţisandhi*** consciousness. (***Abhi-A-2-153***) If those beings are blind, deaf, eunuch and lacking of nose, at least (30) kinds of corporealities arise through three kinds of corporeal  units,  viz.,  tongue-decad,  body-decad,  base-decad.  It  should  be  recognized appropriate  numbers  of  corporealities  occurring  within  the  range  of  30-70  can  arise accordingly. (***Abhi-A-2-153***) 

**PAGE-184** 

**It should be scrutinized carefully**\_\_\_\_\_ The righteous ***meditator*** had also experience to exist in *brahma’s* realm in past. If he has got superior kind of absorption ***dhammas*** with heartfelt desire to become *brahma’s* life in future, he might become *brahma*s of any kind. If he can discern whether or not spontaneous born coming-into-existence arose in past or will arise in future exactly, he must scrutinize whether (30) kinds of corporealities arise during ***paţisandhi*** or not. Furthermore he should like to scrutinize which kind of ***paţisandhi*** arose or will arise through which kind of absorption, again. 

For instance\_\_\_\_\_ if one had got ***paţisandhi*** of fine-material *brahma’s* world through the first absorption wholesome action, during spontaneous ***paţisandhi*** there are (30) kinds of corporealities  and  (34)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***;  while  if  is  resulted  from  the  second absorption  wholesome  action,  during  spontaneous ***paţisandhi***  there  will be  (30)  kinds  of corporealities and (32) kinds of mental ***dhammas***. It should be understood in this way. If one can discern the experience of having ***paţisandhi*** of heavenly being through spontaneous born 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE32

*deva*, he has to scrutinize whether or not (70) kinds of corporealities arise simultaneously together with (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** for joyful ***paţisandhi*** with three roots while (33) kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  for  neutral  feeling  ***paţisandhi***  with  three  roots.  It  should  be understood similarly on future *deva*’s existence. These are important facts to scrutinize past and future ***paţisandhi*** correctly. It plays vital important role in keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas***. It should be understood similarly on exceptional case of some persons with  deficiency  of  some  controlling  faculties.  The  controlling  faculty  which  is  wanting should be scrutinized systematically. 

With  referring  to  ***Pāli***  Text  of  ***Dhamma  hadaya  Vibhanga***,  Sub-commentator, ***Mūlaţīkā*** Sayadaw decided the fact there is no ***paţisandhi*** without nose-transparent-element for beings of sensual sphere with ***samsedaja*** and spontaneous born yoni. (***Mūlaţī-2-109***) 

21. **Explanation of *Anuţīka Sayadaw*** 

Although it is said collectively n the commentary that “***samsedajopapātīsu, athavā avakamsato timsa (Abhi-A-2-153)*** = in ***samsedaja*** and spontaneous born beings there are at least  (30)  kinds  of  corporealities  during  ***paţisandhi***,  it  should  be  inferred  both  kinds  of ***samsedaja***  and  spontaneous  born  ***yoni***  when  it  is  combined  with  the  words,  “***satati ukkamsatova rūpāni*** = in maximum range of (70) kinds of corporealities arise”. It means in sensual sphere during ***paţisandhi*** of ***samsedaja*** and spontaneous ***yoni*** can consist of (70) kinds of corporealities in maximum range. When it is combined with the words, “at least (30) kinds of corporealities arise”, however, it should not inferred to spontaneous born ***yoni*** but ***samsedaja*** ***yoni*** only. It means that during ***paţisandhi*** of beings with ***samsedaja*** ***yoni*** at least (30) kinds of corporealities arise. It is presented with referring to the following commentary of ***Āyātana Yamaka***. 

**PAGE-185** 

***Pāli*** ***Quotation*** (***Anuţī*-2-123, Abhi-A-3-309)** 

There is impossible to arise spontaneous born being with nose-transparent-element in sensual sphere. If it is possible to arise, in the commentary of ***Āyātana Yamaka*** (base pairs), the commentator Sayadaw will explain that “the Exalted One preached (8) kinds of bases arise apparently in some beings”, etc. Therefore, it is no spontaneous born being without nose-clear-sensitivity. ***(See detail in Anuţī-2-123, 124)*** 

***sabbam tam vīmamsitvā gahetabbam. (Anuţī-2-124)*** 

All those facts are ***dhammas*** which should be inferred through reasoning of practicing ***meditators***, themselves. In this case, if one had got experience to become ***samsedaja*** and spontaneous  born  beings  in  a  curve  of  journey  of  rounds  of  rebirth,  he  should  like  to scrutinize and keep in mind in order to know exactly whether it is possible or not.  

**Eye-decad corporeal unit\_\_\_\_\_ *Pāli* *Quotation* *(Abhi-A-2-153)*** 

The  eye-decad  corporeal  unit  (***cakkhudaska***  ***kalāpa***)  means  a  pile  of  corporeal ***dhammas*** which comprises (10) kinds of corporealities, i.e., earth-element, water-element, fire-element, air-element, colour, smell, flavour, nutriment, vitaility, eye-clear-sensitivity. It should be understood remaining decades similarly. (***Abhi-A-2-153***) 
PAGE31

Eye-decad is not real ultimate corporeal ***dhammas***. Above pile of (10) kinds of nature within eye-decad, actually, are real ultimate corporeal ***dhammas***. The righteous practicing ***meditator*** has to discern and keep in mind those ultimate corporeal ***dhammas*** with the help of penetrative experiential knowledge. 

22. Opinions of ***Mūlaţīkā*** and ***Anuţīkā*** 

The explanation of commentary that “during ***paţisandhi*** at least two or three kinds of decades arise”, is explained with referring to beings with ***gabbhaseyyaka yoni*** (viviparous animals who have got ***paţisandhi*** within mother’s womb). It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ In those beings with ***samsedaja*** and ***opapatika*** ***yoni*** (spontaneous born conception), other than beings with ***aņdaja***  ***yoni***  and  ***jalābuja***  (=  ***jabbhaseyyaka***)  ***yoni***,  numerous  corporeal  units  arise simultaneously at ***paţisandhi*** mind moment. It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ In the body of *brahma* with the size of numerous ***gāvuta*** (= approximately 5.12 kilometres or 3.18 miles) numerous corporeal units arise simultaneously  at ***paţisandhi*** moment of spontaneous born persons. Therefore corporealities with more than (30) kinds arise simultaneously at ***paţisandhi*** moment.  

**PAGE-186** 

The reason why it can be known is that due to rejecting smell, flavour, nutriment (= ***ojā***)  in  ***Āyātana  Yamaka***  etc.,  without  preaching,  although  there  are  eye-septet  (***cakkhu sattaka***),  ear-septet  (***sota  sattaka***),  vital-hexad  (***jīvitachakha***),  it  can  be  known,  due  to occurrence of plenty of corporealities of those eye-septet etc. ***(Mūlaţī-2-108)*** 

***Mūlaţīkā*** Sayadaw suggested that due to smell, flavour, nutriment were not preached in ***Āyātana Yamaka*** etc., those were rejected.  Only eye-septets arise in the fine-material sphere but not eye-decads, due to lacking of smell, flavour, nutriment within a corporeal unit. Similarly ear-septets, base-septets only arise in them. In spite of arising of vital nonads, vital- haxads only arise, suggested by ***Mūlaţīkā*** Sayadaw. Furthermore he continued to explain as follows: 

Although it was explained in the commentary that eye-decad, ear-decad, base-decad, vital-nonad arise in the body of that *brahma*, in ***Dhamma hadaya Vibhanga*** which will be come later it was preached that\_\_\_\_\_ 

“***rūpadhātuyā  upapattikkhaņe  ţhapetvā  asaññatattānam  devānam  pañcāyatanāni pātubhavanti, pañcadhātuyo pātubhavanti”. (Abhi-2-433)*** 

= At ***paţisandhi*** moment of fine-material element, except that of mindless being, five kinds of bases arise apparently, five kinds of elements arise apparently.” ***(Abhi-2-433)*** And then it was preached in order to show apparent arising bases-elements in that fine-material element as follows\_\_\_\_\_ 

***“rūpadhātuyā cha āyātanāni navadhātuyo.” (Abhi-2-419)*** = in fine-material element (6) kinds of bases and (9) kinds of elements arise apparently”, through preaching sweepingly on all kinds of ***dhammas*** which are deserving to arise in fine-material element (fine-material sphere). (***Mūlaţī-2-108***) 

[The term, ***pañcaāyatana*** (= (5) kinds of bases), means eye-base, ear-base, mind-base, sight-base, ***dhamma***-base (***dhammāyatana***). It is the same way for (5) kinds of elements. The term, ***chaāyatana*** (= (6) kinds of bases), means above (5) kinds and sound-base. The term, ***navadhātu***  (=  (9)  kinds  of  elements),  means  eye-element,  sight-element,  seeing- consciousness-element,  ear-element,  sound-element,  hearing-consciousness-element,  mind- element, ***dhamma***-element, mind-consciousness-element. In this case it should be noticed smell-base, flavour-base, touch-base are not included.] 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE34

Smell, flavour, nutriment are rejected to be preached not only in ***Dhammahadaya*** ***Vibhanga***, but also in the Scripture called ***Kathāvatthu***. As apparent arising of nose-base, tongue-base, body-base in fine-material sphere worth rejecting, apparent arising of smell- base, flavour-base, nutriment is also worth rejecting. 

***sakavādī*** (the person with opinion of the Buddha’s teaching) questions that “is there in the nose-base in that fine-material sphere?” ***Paravādī*** (the person with opinion of out of the Buddha’s teaching) answers that “Yes,” due to presence of shape and form of nose in those brahmas. (It means it is wrong answer.) When the person called ***sakavādī***  questions again that “is there smell-base also in that brahma’s world?” the person called ***paravādī*** answers correctly that “it can not said in this way”. ***(Mūlaţī-2-108)*** 

**PAGE-187** 

***Mūlaţīkā*** Sayadaw suggested that in accordance with above questions and answers nose-base, tongue-base, body-base, smell-base, flavour-base, nutriment are absent in brahmas of fine-material sphere also, other than mindless being. Although brahmas have got shape and form of nose, nose-clear-sensitivity (= nose transparent element) are wanting, resulting in inability to arise smelling-consciousness. Similarly – although shape and form of tongue and body  are  present  tongue-clear-sensitivity  (tongue  transparent  element)  and  body-clear- sensitivity  (body  transparent  element)  are  wanting,  resulting  in  inability  to  arise  tasting- consciousness  and  touching-consciousness  respectively.  Although  appearance  of  man  is present both kinds of sex-corporealitites are wanting. Sensual desire and lust are removed through efficiency of practice. Due to presence of nourishment of ple***asurā***ble interest called ***pīti***  which  is  associating  with  absorption  (=  ***pītibhakkhā***),  they  never  take  food  called ***kabaļīkāra*** ***āhāra*** (the nourishment which is ingested as palmful towards the mouth, even though it is not ingested as palmful). 

***Visadisūpamā***\_\_\_\_\_ Three kinds of great elements called the earth-element, the fire-element, the  air-element,  which  are  not  objects  of  touching-consciousness  (or body-door-cognitive process)  which  arise  depending  on  body-clear-sensitivity,  are  consisting  within  every corporeal unit in the fine-material sphere. As it is worth saying the fact every corporeal unit consists of three kinds of great elements which are not touching-bases in continuum of fine- material brahmas in that way, it is not possible to say the fact olfactory-object, sapid-object which are present in those fine-material sphere without smell-base, flavour-base. Why is it. – It  is because  as  the  nature  of  elements,  i.e.,  the earth-element  etc.,  which  are  free  from tangible, which are not tangible, arise in those fine-material spheres, there are no nature of smell,  flavour,  which  are  free  from  occurrence  of  olfactory-object,  sapid-object  in  fine- material spheres. (***Mūlaţī-2-108***) 

The term, ***āyatana***, means “factor”. There is a question that if one will say the fact “even though smell, flavour are present, nose-clear-sensitivity, etc., are absent and those are not factor of nose-contact etc., resulting in not preaching on those smell, flavour through the name of ***āyatana*** (base)”, which kind of fault will be present. 

The answer is as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to absence of occurrence of factor of nose-contact, etc., even though those smell, flavour were not preached as bases, the term, ***dhātu***, means not being (***nissatta***), not living being (***nijjīva***), resulting in no reason so as not to preach as ***gandhadhātu***, ***rasadhātu*** (smell- element,  flavour-element).  In  the  ***Pāli***  Text  of  ***Dhammahadaya  Vibhanga***,  while  it  was preaching as “***pañcadhātuyo*** = five elements”, those smell-element, flavour-element are not included. Due to excluding in that way it can be understood there are no smell, taste in the fine-material spheres. (***Mūlaţī-2-108***) 
PAGE33

Furthermore\_\_\_\_\_ Every ***dhamma*** (= nature) has got designation as ***dhamma***, due to presence of specific nature. Each ***dhamma*** has got its specific nature.  

**PAGE-188** 

If smell, flavour are really present in brahma’s world, it is desirable on occurrence of ***gandhadhamma***  (nature  of  smell),  ***rasadhamma***  (nature  of  flavour),  due  to  presence  of character  of  specific  nature  which  can  be  kept  by  its  ***dhamma***.  Every  ***dhamma***  has  no character, other than specific character etc. (With regarding to the word, “etc., (***ādi***)”, general character must be inferred. If ***gandhadhamma***, ***rasadhamma*** arise in brahma’s world, every ***dhamma***  should  be  preached  as  ***dhammāyatana***  (***dhamma***-base)  in  a  way  that “***dhammoāyatananti āmantā***”. Even though there is lacking in occurrence of smell-base, flaovour-base for those smell, flavour, any kind of nature of bases (***āyatana***) is deserving to preach. 

[It  means  due  to  presence  of  preaching  on  every  ***dhamma***  as  ***dhamma***-base,  the occurrence of ***dhamma***-base, actually, is worth preaching, even though there is no occurrence of smell-base, flavour-base for smell, flavour; however there is no preaching on occurrence of ***dhamma***-base in that way, resulting in deserving to decide that there are no smell, flavour in the fine-material sphere.] 

If  one  infers  the  fact  “smell,  flavour  do  not  occur  as  smell,  flavour  but  not  as occurrence of ***dhamma*** in the fine-material sphere”, those smell, flavour can be inferred within ***dhamma***-base.  For instance- it is similar to counting on three  great elements, the earth-element  etc.,  as  ***dhamma***-base  despite  occurrence  of  toughing.  If  there  is  only occurrence of smell, flavour but not occurrence of ***dhamma***, there will be occurrence of bases for smell, flavour as there is occurrence of bases of three great elements, the earth-element etc., in the classification of ***dhamma***-base. If both kinds of occurrence of smell, flavour and occurrence of bases are present in that way, the designation as “smell-base, flavour base”, will be reached through preaching methodology of ***atthāpanna*** (the meaning will be reached inevitably)  after  making  combination  of  smell,  flavour  and  base  (=  ***gandho  ca  so āyatanañcati gandhā-yatanam, raso ca so āyatanañcāti rasāyatanam***). If it is reached into that meaning in that way, it should not be rejected the fact “smell-base, flavour-base are present in the fine-material sphere. (***Mūlaţī-2-108, 109***) 

Due to presence of preaching by the Exalted One that “***tayo āhārā (Abhi-2-419)*** = three  kinds  of  nourishment,  i.e.,  nourishment  of  contact,  nourishment  of  volition, nourishment of consciousness, are present in the fine-material sphere, excluding mindless being”, it should be understood the fact ***kabaļīlikāra*** ***āhāra*** is absent in that fine-material sphere. 

Therefore when numbers of corporeal ***dhammas*** which are present in the continuum of brahmas existing in that fine-material sphere through such means, it is not contradict to the ***Pāli*** Text and then counting in that way should be carried out. If it is counted in this way it never contradict with ***dhammatā***. 

(In this case, the term, ***dhammatā***, means ***Pāli*** Text, in the next method, it means possible nature of corporeal ***dhamma*** in the fine-material sphere.) (***Mūlaţī-2-109, Anuţī-118, 119, 120***) 

In  the  Sub-sub-commentary  called  ***Anuţīkā***,  the  opinion  of  ***Mūlaţīkā***  Sayadaw  is rejected  but  supporting  to  the  Commentary  and  then  it  is  explained  in  detail.  It  will  be presented the essence as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Anuţī-2-120)*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE36

**PAGE-189** 

In this case, due to lack of nose-base, tongue-base in the continuum of fine-material beings, smell, flavour, which are present apparently, can not perform the function of bases. (It means nose-base and tongue-base are lacking in the continuum of fine-material brahmas, resulting  in  impossibility  to  arise  nose-door-cognitive  process  and  tongue-door-cognitive process; then nose-contact and tongue-contact are also impossible to arise. It means those olfactory-object and sapid object are unable to perform functions of nose-contact and tongue- contact respectively.) 

Therefore these kinds of preaching that “five kinds of bases arise apparently, six kinds of bases arise apparently”… etc., are made without considering on smell, flavour as bases. The reason why it is preached on presence of three kinds of nourishment as “***tayo*** ***āhāra***”, is the fact that due to lack of nutriment of ***kabaļīkāra*** ***āhāra*** which is deserving to ingest, the function of nutriment, which can be called producing corporealities with nutriment as eighth factor, can not be performed. The preaching in this way is not related to absence of both smell, flavour and nutriment totally. (***Anuţī-2-120***) 

According to explanation of this Sub-sub-commentary called ***Anuţīkā***, ***kammajaojā*** (nutriment  produced  by  ***kamma***),  ***cittajaojā***  (nutriment  produced  by  mind),  ***utujaojā*** (nutriment  produced  by  temperature)  are  really  present  in  continuum  of  fine-material brahmas, excluding mindless being. Those kinds of nutriments are unable to produce new corporeal unit with nutriment s eighth factor, due to lack of supporting factor of ***āhārajaojā*** (nutriment produced by nutriment), resulting in inability to perform function of nutriment. It should be recognized the Exalted One preached the fact only three kinds of nutriment are present, due to inability to perform in that way. It will be continued to present one interesting fact found in rebutments of ***Anuţīkā*** Sayadaw as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

Eye-base is lacking in the continuum of mindless being. It should not considered that “if the eye-base which is ***visayī*** is absent, the sight-base, which is ***visaya***, is also absent:”. This is because the visible-object of mindless being can be occurred as object of other beings, except mindless being, himself. Similarly it should not considered that “due to lack of nose- base, tongue-base which are ***visayī***, smell, flavour are also absent.” It should be recognized it is similar to the fact although body-base called ***visayī*** is absent three kinds of elements, the earth-element,  the  fire-element,  the  air-element,  which  are  ***visaya***,  which  are  not  tactile- elements, are present really. (***Anuţī***-***2-120***) 

[***visaya***-***visayī*** – Objects, visible-object etc., are called ***visaya***. The eye with object called  visible-object  is  called  ***visayī***,  due  to  presence  of  the  specific  character  called appropriate occurrence to appear visible-object. It should be understood similarly on ear, etc.] 

If one suggests that due to lack of nose-base, tongue-base, which are ***visayī***, smell, flavour which are ***visaya***, are also absent, the sight-base which is ***visaya*** should be absent in mindless beings, due to lack of eye-base which is ***visayī***.  If it is so,  due to presence of explanation of ***Mūlaţīkā*** Sayadaw in a way that only vital hexads can arise in mindless being but not vital nonads, only vital pentads are possible to arise really in mindless beings. (It is possible to arise five kinds of corporealities i.e., the earth-element, the water-element, the air- element, vitality in mindless beings.) 

**PAGE-190** 

**It should be scrutinized\_\_\_\_\_** These are very important facts to be scrutinized for great wise persons  who  are  learned  in  scriptures  of  all  ***Pāli***  Text  together  with  commentaries.  The righteous ***meditator***, he himself, should like to scrutinize how many kinds of corporealities arise  exactly  in  past  and  future  fine-material  brahma’s  lives.  When  research  on  most 
PAGE35

***meditator***s were performed it was found that more frequent meditates support the saying of commentary.  The  righteous  ***meditator***,  yourselves  should  like  to  scrutinize  through penetrating with the help of four-edged-dagger called knowledge which is sharpened on the noble slab of concentration well after standing on the ground called virtue. 

**PAGE-191** 

23. **Variation  and  non-variation  in  aggregate-object-destination-root-feeling-initial application-sustained application** 
1) **Among four immaterial sphere with four aggregates** 
1. After death of boundless space sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** in that sphere again the death-consciousness of boundless space took external object of space concept while the consciousness of new ***paţisandhi*** also takes external object of space concept which had been taken by impulsions adjacent to death. (Both aggregates and objects are not varied.) 
1. After death of boundless space sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** in boundless consciousness sphere the death-consciousness of boundless space sphere being took external object of space concept, while ***paţisandhi*** of boundless consciousness sphere arises by taking internal object of wholesome absorption of boundless space. (Aggregates are not varied but objects are varied.) 
1. After death of boundless space sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** in emptiness sphere, death-consciousness of boundless space took external object of space concept while ***paţisandhi*** of emptiness sphere arises by taking external object of emptiness concept which is nature  of  voidness  of  wholesome  consciousness  of boundless  space.  (Aggregates  are  not varied but objects are varied.) 
1. After  death  of  boundless  space  sphere  being  when  he  has  got  ***paţisandhi***  of  neither- perception-nor-non-perception  the  death-consciousness  of  boundless  space  took  external object of space concept, while ***paţisandhi*** of neither-perception-nor-non-perception arises by taking internal object of wholesome absorption of emptiness. (Only objects are varied) 
1. After death of boundless consciousness sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** of that sphere again the death-consciousness of boundless consciousness sphere took internal object of  wholesome  absorption  of  boundless  space  while  new  ***paţisandhi***  of  boundless consciousness sphere arises by taking internal object of wholesome absorption of boundless space which is taken by impulsions adjacent to death. (Both aggregates and objects are not varied.) 
1. After death of boundless consciousness sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** 

of emptiness sphere the death-consciousness of boundless consciousness sphere took internal object of wholesome absorption of boundless space while ***paţisandhi*** of emptiness sphere arises  by  taking  external  object  of  emptiness  concept  which  is  nature  of  voidness  of wholesome consciousness of boundless space. (Aggregates are not varied but objects are varied.) 

7. After death of boundless consciousness sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE38

of  neither  perception-nor-non-perception  sphere  the  death-consciousness  of  boundless consciousness sphere took internal object of wholesome absorption of boundless space 

while ***paţisandhi*** of neither-perception-nor-non-perception arises by taking internal object of wholesome absorption of emptiness. (Only objects are varied) 

8. After death of emptiness sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** of that sphere again the death-consciousness of emptiness sphere took external object of emptiness concept which is nature of voidness of wholesome consciousness of boundless space while new ***paţisandhi*** of emptiness sphere arises by taking external object of emptiness concept which is nature of voindness  of  wholesome  consciousness  of  boundless  space  which  had  been  taken  by impulsions adjacent to death. (Both aggregates and objects are not varied.) 

**PAGE-192** 

9. After death of emptiness sphere being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** of neither-perception- nor-non-perception  the  death-consciousness  of  emptiness  sphere  took  external  object  of emptiness concept which is nature of voidness of wholesome consciousness of boundless space  while  ***paţisandhi***  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  arises  by  taking  internal object of wholesome absorption of emptiness. (Only objects are varied) 
9. After death of neither-perception-nor-non-perception being when he has got ***paţisandhi*** of that  sphere  again  the  death-consciousness  of  neither-perception-nor-non-perception  took internal  object  of  wholesome  absorption  of  emptiness  sphere  while  new  ***paţisandhi***  of neither-perception-nor-non-perception sphere arises by taking internal object of wholesome absorption of emptiness sphere which had been taken by impulsions adjacent to death. (***Abhi- a-2-154***) (Both aggregates and objects are not varied.) 

These methods are only kinds of death and ***paţisandhi*** occurring among immaterial spheres. 

2) Sometimes  at  the  moment  contiguous  after  death  of  fine-material  being  with  (4) aggregates the ***paţisandhi*** of sensual sphere with three roots, which has (5) aggregates, arises. (Aggregates are varied.) 
2) Sometimes at the moment contiguous after death of either sensual sphere or fine-material sphere, which have (5) aggregates, the ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with (4) aggregates arises. (Both aggregates and objects are varied.) 
2) Thus of the moment contiguous after death-consciousness with object of past ***dhamma***, those kinds of ***paţisandhi*** with past object, conceptual object, present object arise. (Objects are varied.) 
2) At the moment contiguous after death of some sensual joyful existence those ***paţisandhi*** of some woeful existences arise.(It shows variation in destination.) 

***Pāli Quotation*** (***Mūlaţī-2-109***) 

The ***paţisandhi*** of woeful existence can not arise after death of fine-material and immaterial spheres. It is because those most powerful sensual wholesome actions which give rise  to  produce  sensual  existence  are  access  absorption,  sensual  absorption  which  arise previously before those absorptions of fine-material and immaterial spheres. Due to presence of very powerful efficacy of those sensual wholesome actions, when those being are dead 
PAGE37

they  have  got  ***paţisandhi***  of  sensual  joyful  existences  only  but  not  opportunity  to  get ***paţisandhi*** of woeful existences. (***Mūlaţī-2-109***) 

***ekaccaduggatipaţisandhi\_\_\_\_\_*** In this case advantage to say the term, ***ekacca*** (=some), is as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

The term, ***nānattakāya nānattasaññī***, means human beings and devas. Among those devas, some devas called ***vinipātika asurā*** are also included. 

**PAGE-193** 

Among  those  devas  called ***vinipātika  asurā***  some  have  got ***paţisandhi***  with  three roots. Because various ***paţisandhi*** with three roots, two roots, joyful ***paţisandhi*** without root of  those  devas  are  included  as  ***vinipāta***  in  words  which  were  preached  in  a  say  that “***apāyamduggatim vinipātan***” etc., those kinds are inferred as woeful ***paţisandhi***. Those non- real woeful ***paţisandhi*** of ***vinipātika asurā*** are a kind of woeful one which can arise after death of all joyful  existences of sensual, fine-material and immaterial spheres.  Some are ***paţisandhi***  of  woeful  existences  which  can  not  arise  after  all  kinds  of  death  of  joyful existences. Therefore it is said the word, ***ekacca duggati*** (some woeful existences), with intention to omit ***paţisandhi*** of those ***vinipātika asurā*** which are designated as ***paţisandhi*** of woeful existence, even though they are not ***paţisandhi*** of woeful existence. It is right. – ***paţisandhi*** of woeful existence of ***vinipātika*** ***asurā*** only can arise contiguously after death of some  sensual  joyful  existences.  It  can  not  arise  contiguously  after  death  of  all  joyful existences of sensual, fine-material, immaterial spheres. (***Mūlaţī-2-109, 110***) 

In the next method – Because there are two kinds of woeful ***paţisandhi***, i.e., the first kind which arises contiguously after death of joyful existence and the second kind which arises contiguously after death of woeful existence, the second kind is intended to omit and the first kind  is  intended  to  infer,  resulting  in  saying  as  ***ekaccaduggati  paţisandhi***  (some  woeful existence ***paţisandhi***) through adding the word, ***ekacca*** (=some). (***Mūlaţī-2-110***) 

6) At the moment contiguous after death of being without root (***ahetuka cuti***) the ***paţisandhi*** with root (***sahetuka paţisandhi***) can also arise. 
6) At  the  moment  contiguous  after  death  of  being  with  two  roots  (***duhetuka  cuti***)the ***paţisandhi*** with three roots (***tihetuka*** ***paţisandhi***) can also arise. 
6) At the moment contiguous after death of being with neutrality feeling (***upekkhāsahagata cuti***) the ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling (***somanassa sahagata*** ***paţisandhi***)) can also arise. 
6) At the moment contiguous after death of being without pleasurable interest (***appītika cuti***) the ***paţisandhi*** with pleasurable interest (***sappītika paţisandhi***) can also arise. 
6) At the moment contiguous after death of being without initial application (***avitakka cuti***) the ***paţisandhi*** with initial application (***savitakka*** ***paţisandhi***) can also arise. 
6) At the moment contiguous after death of being without sustain application (***avicāra cuti***) the ***paţisandhi*** with sustain application (***savicāra*** ***paţisandhi***) can also arise. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE40

12) At the moment contiguous after death of being without initial application and sustain application  (***avitakka  avicāra  cuti***)  the  ***paţisandhi***  with  initial  application  and  sustain application (***savitakka savicāra*** ***paţisandhi***) can also arise. 

Thus  such  such  meaning  which  are  deserving  to  yoke  should  be  yoked  together through that that reverse ways which had been already yoked. 

The meaning which is deserving to yoke reversely – It  should be understood appropriate meaning that is deserving to yoke, such as, “at the moment contiguous after death of some woeful  existence  some  joyful  existence  ***paţisandhi***  can  arise”  etc.  (Reverse  of  variation shown in (E)) 

**PAGE-194** 

**The meaning which is not deserving to yoke reversely\_\_\_\_\_** 

***Pāli Quotation*** (***Mūlaţī***-***2-110) (Vs-2-186)*** 

1) Sometimes at the moment contiguous after death of immaterial sphere being with four aggregates the ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with four aggregates only which has not varied in objects arises. {It shows death and ***paţisandhi*** which are not varied in both aggregates and objects. It refers to four kinds of immaterial persons who have got ***paţisandhi*** again in present realm.} 
1) At the moment contiguous after death of immaterial being with external object which is not lofty (***mahaggata***) the ***paţisandhi*** with the same aggregates but with different objects, i.e., internal object which is lofty arises. [Because both death and ***paţisandhi*** are four mental aggregates only, aggregates are not varied but objects are varied. It refers to both those persons who arise in boundless consciousness sphere and the neither-perception-nor-non-perception sphere, after death of boundless space sphere; and the person who arises in the neither-perception0nor-non-perception sphere after death of emptiness sphere.] 

In this number (2) the meaning which is deserving to yoke reversely should not be inferred. This is because there is no ***paţisandhi*** of immaterial sphere with object of external ***dhamma*** which is not lofty at the moment contiguous after death consciousness with object of internal ***dhamma*** which is lofty. (***Mūlaţī***-***2-110***) 

According  to  above  explanation  of ***Mūlaţīkā***  it  falls  into  the  meaning  that  at  the moment contiguous after death of boundless consciousness with object of lofty ***dhamma*** called the consciousness of boundless space the ***paţisandhi*** of emptiness sphere with external object called emptiness concept which is voidness of that consciousness of boundless space sphere can not arise. 

24. **Former existence and new existence** 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Abhi-A-2-154)*** 

As  mentioned  above  –  it  can  be  said  every  corporeal  ***dhamma***,  every  mental ***dhamma***, which arises at ***paţisandhi*** moment, reaches into the next coming-into-existence, due to presence of acquired causal ***dhammas***, action etc., which can give rise to produce consequence.  The being never reach into the next existence; the living ***jīva*** (= ***atta***) never reach into the next existence. There is no phenomenon in which those corporeal ***dhamma***s and mental ***dhamma***s transfer from previous existence to this present existence. There is no 
PAGE39

obvious occurrence in this present existence without causal ***dhamma***s, action, etc., which had been cultivated in previous existences. ***(Abhi-a-2-154)*** 

**PAGE-195** 

In  this  verses,  with  regarding  to  these  words,  “***laddhapaccayamitidhamma***- ***mattametam bhavantaramupeti*** (=every corporeal ***dhamma***, every mental ***dhamma***, which arises at ***paţisandhi*** moment, reaches into the next coming-into-existence, due to presence of acquired causal ***dhamma***s, action etc., which can give rise to produce consequence)”, the wrong view called annihilation view has been rejected. 

With regarding to these words “***nāssa tato sankanti*** (=there is no phenomenon in which those corporeal ***dhamma***s and mental ***dhamma***s transfer from previous existence to this present existence)”, the wrong view called eternity view (***sassata diţţhi***) by which one believes that corporeal and mental ***dhamma***s of previous existence transfer to this existence, has also been rejected. 

With  regarding  to  these  words,  “***na  tato  hetum  vinā  hoti***  =  there  is  no  obvious occurrence in this present existence without causal ***dhammas***, action etc., which had been cultivated in previous existences”, the wrong view called ***navasatta pātubhāva*** ***diţţhi*** (wrong view of creator) by which one believes that the being, the “self” (***atta***) is newly occurred by creation of any creator called ***parama atta***, has been rejected. 

It will be explicit the meaning of previous saying that “only corporeal and mental ***dhamma*** with acquired causal ***dhamma***s, action etc.”, through obvious continuity of death, ***paţisandhi*** of mankind\_\_\_\_\_. In detail\_\_\_\_\_ In the previous existence in the continuum of beings, who were quite close to death through its specific nature (= loss of life-span); who were moribund through either suicide by himself, such as drinking poison or murdered by others; who were intolerance to falling of weapons, swords called feeling (***vedanā***), which was unable to be tolerate, which was capable of cutting off muscles and nerve fibres that were connecting all kinds of various organs and tissues, which has got the demarcation as death, when his or her body became dried up continuously as verdant leaf of palmyrapalm was put into hot sunshine, when various controlling faculties, eye etc., became very weak, when either heart-base only or only controlling faculties of body, vitality, mind was still remained the consciousness, which depended well on the heart-base which was still remained at that moribund moment, arose by taking any kind of objects i.e., the action (***kamma***) which is any random kind among four kinds of actions, heavy action (***garukamma***) or habitual action (***āciņņa*** ***kamma***) or the action which was done at quite close to death (***āsanakamma***) the action which was done inadvertenly in previous lives, previous periods of  present life (***kaţattākamma***), which had got supporting of remaining factors called acquired destination (***gati***),  personality  (***upadhi***),  time  (***upadhi***),  instigation  (***payoga***),  which  can  be  called formation (***sańkhāra***); or emblem of action, emblem of destination which were appeared by that action. ***(Abhi-A-2-154)*** 

[In this case during moribund period some abnormal conditions, sight failure hearing failure, smell failure tasting failure etc., can be occurred. It is due to insufficient arising of some corporeal units produced by ***kamma***, eye-decad etc., and due to very weak efficacy of present  arising  corporealities  produced  by  ***kamma***.  The  commentary  used  the  term, “***niruddhesūti***  =  when  cessation  occur”  for  very  weakness  in  that  way.  It  is  explained previously that those impulsions adjacent to death may be fivefold-door cognitive processes, eye-door-cognitive process etc. 

***atimanda bhāvūpagamanatam vā sandhāya “niruddhesūti” vuttam, na anavasesa nirodham. (Mahāţī-2-311)*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE42

**PAGE-196** 

Thus the craving causes to incline-action of that consciousness, which arises by taking any kind of three objects called action-emblem of action-emblem of destination (this kind of saying  is  called ***ekattanaya***  and  it  means  continuity  of  mind),  towards  any  one of  those objects,  action  etc.,  due  to  lack  of  removing  of  craving,  ignorance  by  the  Noble  Path ***dhamma***, resulting in covering with ignorance so as not see faults of rounds of rebirth, faults of  existence.  Formations  (***sańkhāra***)  which  are  associating  with  consciousness  occur  as throwing. ***(Abhi-A-2-154, 155)*** 

**5. 25 The meaning of “inclination by craving”** 

There  is  a  reasonable  question  that  during  saying  that  “at  moribund  moment  the craving causes to inclination of consciousness which is taking any kind of objects, action etc.”, how the craving can cause to inclination as if it is not arising at that moment. Due to occurrence of both un-removing of craving through the Noble Path ***dhamma*** and reaching to termination of continuity of mind through maturing, the continuity of mind inclines towards any kind of objects, action etc., which are factor of foundation of ***paţisandhi***. That kind of phenomenon  can  be  said  “the  craving  causes  to  inclination.  The  way  of  preparing  on continuity of mind through frequent occurring on any kind of objects, action etc., which appear at moribund moment is the factor of establishment of ***paţisandhi*** consciousness on any kind of those objects, action etc. 

It  means  that  during  developing  the  action  which  will  give  rise  to  occur  ***paţisandhi*** consequence either the craving which surrounds the action frequently or the craving which deposits as underlying tendency element (***anusayadhātu***) cause to inclination of continuity of consciousness towards any kinds of objects, action etc., which appears through efficiency of that action as if that action can give rise to occur its consequence. The inclination by craving in that way can occur in the continuum of only beings with craving which is not eradicated by the Noble Path ***dhamma***. It means that kind of inclination cannot arise in the continuum of Arahant. (***Mūlaţī-2-111, Anuţī-2-125***) 

26. **Throwing by compatible formations** 

According  to  the  term,  ***sahajātasańkhāra***  (compatible  formations),  volitions  of impulsions which arise together with consciousness of impulsion adjacent to death must be inferred. In the next method – those volitions and associating mental concomitants must be inferred. It means that those formations ***dhammas*** throw the ***paţisandhi*** consciousness on to any kind of objects which appears at moribund moment among three kinds of objects called action-emblem  of  action-emblem  of  destination.  In  this  case,  even  though  it  is  said  that “throw” it is not real throwing function, due to lack of endeavour in ultimate ***dhammas***. It is said “throw”, due to occurrence of similarity to “throwing function” through benefiting of compatible formations in order to occur factor of establishment of ***paţisandhi*** consciousness on any kind of those objects, action etc. (***Mūlaţī-2-111***) 

**PAGE-197** 

That  consciousness  which  arises  through  continuity  of  consciousness  called  the consciousness  adjacent  to  death,  the  death-consciousness,  the  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness 
PAGE41

abandons both depended object and depended base which occurred previously as a man who jumps over main drain by holding the rope tied with a tree on this bank. Through the craving which causes to inclination towards any kind of objects, action etc.; through throwing of formations  ***dhammas***  which  arise  together  with  consciousness  of  impulsions  adjacent  to death as a man who jumps over main drain by holding the rope tied with a tree on this bank. 

The  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  which  arises  later,  which  is  produced  by  action,  arises depending on these causal ***dhammas***, 

1. ***ārammaņa*** ***paccaya*** = efficiency of relation of object, 
1. ***sampayutta*** ***paccaya*** = efficiency of relation of association, 
1. ***kamma*** ***paccaya*** = efficiency of relation of asynchronous action, 

Though  either  pleasing  with  depended  object  and  attaining  depended  base- corporeality (it refers to five-groups-existence) or through pleasing with depended object but not attaining depended base-corporeality (it refers to four-groups-existences). ***(Abhi-A-2-155)*** 

***tam viññāņam***\_\_\_\_\_ Continuity of all these consciousness, viz., the consciousness adjacent to death, death-consciousness, ***paţisandhi***-consciousness are called “ that consciousness (***tam viññāņam***)”  through  ***ekattanaya***,  due  to  occurrence  of  single  continuity.  Among  those consciousness within one continuity, the consciousness which is caused to inclination by craving, means continuity of consciousness which arise adjacent to death previously. It may be a few or numerous cognitive processes. The consciousness which is thrown by formations means ***paţisandhi*** consciousness of next existence. 

27. **From this bank to other bank** 

As a man who jumps over other bank of the main drain by holding rope ties with the tree grown near main drain and throwing himself, resulting in standing on other bank- 

1. any  kind  of  objects,  action  etc.,  which  appears  at  moribund  moment,  which  was associated with the self-identity of previous existence, is similar to rope, the craving is similar to desire to jump over other bank, 
1. formations ***dhammas*** which throw ***paţisandhi*** consciousness are similar to diligence by which jumping over other bank is performed, it should be understood in this way. 
1. The man who reaches on other bank stands on the ground by holding something, if he has got anything which can be held as the rope tied with a tree on other bank. If nothing can be held he stands on the ground through diligence of himself. Similarly- ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  arises  through  attaining  depended  heart-base  which  is associated with the self-identity of new existence in five-groups-existence, while it arises through pure efficiency of relation of object, relation of association, relation of action, without attaining depended heart-base in the four-groups-existence. (***Mūlaţī-2- 111***) 

**PAGE-198** 

28. **Death and *paţisandhi*** 

In  these  consciousness  of  death  and  ***paţisandhi***,  preceding  consciousness  is designated as the death-consciousness, due to occurrence of ability to transfer from present existence.  Succeeding  consciousness  is  designated  as  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness,  due  to occurrence of ability to connect next coming-into-existence previously just after cessation of former existence. In the next method – It is designated as ***paţisandhi*** consciousness, due to 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

occurrence  of  ability  to  connect  the  new  coming-into-existence  with  conception  (***yoni***), destination (***gati***), foundation of consciousness (***viññāņa ţhiti***), being’s dwelling (***sattāvāsa***) after interruption of old existence. ***(Abhi-A-2-155)*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2- 155)*** 

This ***paţisandhi*** consciousness does not reach from previous existence to presence existence but arises in this present existence only. It should be recognized it does not arise apparently without those causal ***dhammas*** of previous existence, i.e.,  

1. definite action (***janakakamma***) which can produce ***paţisandhi*** consequence, 
1. groups  of  formations  ***dhammas***,  contact  etc.,  or  volitional  formation  which  were associating with consciousness of impulsions adjacent to death, 
1. the craving called ***nati*** (= it is the phenomenon by which continuity of mind inclines towards new coming-into-existence), 
1. any kind of objects called action-emblem of action-emblem of destination, 
1. covering of ignorance etc. 

**Echo**\_\_\_\_\_  When  one  shouts  loudly  near  a  mountain  the  sound  reverberates  from  the mountain and it is called “echo”. As that echo is not the sound of original person who shouts loudly  but  it  can  not  arise  in  the  absence  of  original  one’s  sound,  similarly\_\_\_\_\_  this ***paţisandhi*** consciousness does not reach from previous existence to present existence but it can  not  arise  in  the  absence  of  causal  ***dhammas***  which  had  been  cultivated  in  previous existences. 

**Light of open oil lamp** \_\_\_\_\_As the light of later open oil lamp does not transfer from the light of former open oil lamp but it can not arise without the light of former open oil lamp or 

**Seal**\_\_\_\_\_ When the seal is pressed on paper, as the impression of seal is not transfer from original seal but it can not arise in the absence of original seal, 

**Reflection of the face on the mirror** \_\_\_\_\_When one looks himself on the surface of mirror, as the reflection of face on the mirror does not transfer from one’s face but it can not arise in the absence of one’s face, similarly – this ***paţisandhi*** consciousness does not reach from previous existence to present existence but it can not arise in the absence of causal ***dhammas*** which had been cultivated in previous existences. ***(Abhi-A-2-155)*** 

**PAGE-199** 

The echo has the source of sound shouted by one; the light of later open oil lamp has the source of light and wick of the former open oil lamp; the impression of the seal has the source of original seal; the reflection of the face on the mirror has the source of the face which directs towards mirror. 

Due to absence of echo before shouting the sound; due to absence of light of later open oil lamp before the light etc., of former open oil lamp; due to absence of the impression of seal before pressing of original seal; due to absence of reflection of face before directing 

the face etc., towards mirror, the echo arises due to presence of factor, shouting sound even though it does not got to original shouting sound; light of later open oil lamp etc., arise due to presence of factor, the light of former open oil lamp etc., even though it does not go to original light of former oil lamp etc. 

Similarly\_\_\_\_\_ the resultant ***dhamma*** called ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises, due to presence of causal ***dhammas***, action etc., without going to causal ***dhammas***, action etc., It is 
PAGE43

because there is no causal ***dhamma*** of that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness before those causal ***dhammas***, action etc., arise. This ***paţisandhi*** consciousness does not come from previous existence which was place of occurrence of causal ***dhammas***, action etc., to this present existence as echo etc., do not come from original place where the sound occurs. It does not arise in the absence of causal ***dhammas***, action etc., which had been cultivated in previous existence as echo etc., can not arise in the absence of original shouting sound. This is the essence of explanation found in commentary. (***Mūlaţī-2-112***) 

**In the next method** \_\_\_\_\_ As echo etc., do not going (coming) from the place where causes arise to the place where results arise after cooperating together with causal ***dhammas*** in the place where causes arise previously, due to absence of original sound etc., before they arise, as it is not absence of causal ***dhammas***, original sound etc.,\_\_\_\_\_ similarly this ***paţisandhi*** consciousness does not go (come) together with causes, action etc., from that place where causes arise to the place where results arise after congregating at that place where causes, action etc., arise. It does not arise in the absence of causal ***dhammas***, action etc., but it arises in the presence of causal ***dhammas***, action etc. This is because this ***paţisandhi*** consciousness is not present apparently before those causal ***dhammas***, action etc., arise. ***(Mūlaţī-2-112)*** 

**PAGE-200** 

Essence of these two explanations – 

1. The ***paţisandhi*** consciousness does not arise after congregating with causal ***dhammas*** at the place called previous existence where causal ***dhammas***, action etc., arise, and then it approaches to the next coming-into-existence from the place called previous existence where causal ***dhammas***, action etc., exist. The resultant ***dhamma*** called ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  which  arises  apparently,  due  to  presence  of  causal ***dhammas***, action etc., without approaching to the place where causal ***dhammas*** are present. This is the essence of the first explanation. (***Anuţī***-***2-125***) 
1. This ***paţisandhi*** consciousness does not reach to occur as resultant ***dhamma*** after congregating with its causal ***dhammas***, action etc., and then going to the place of new coming-into-existence from the place where those causal ***dhammas*** exist. This is the essence of second explanation. (***Anuţī-2-125***) 

It means it does not go to the place where causes are present, it does not come to the place where results are present. 

29. ***Ekatā-nānatā natthi*** 

During arising of this ***paţisandhi*** consciousness through causal ***dhammas*** cultivated in previous existences there is neither single occurrence nor different occurrence separately, due to connecting between causal ***dhammas*** of previous existence and resultant ***dhamma*** called present ***paţisandhi*** through continuity of corporeality, continuity of mentality. ***(Abhi- A-2-155)*** 

Even though there is single occurrence (***ekatta***) through a continuity of corporeality- mentality  it  is  no  single  occurrence,  due  to  obvious  occurrence  of  new  ***paţisandhi*** consciousness which is different from former existence. It is also no different occurrence, due to existing through connecting of continuity of corporeality-mentality between past causal ***dhammas*** and present resultant ***dhammas*** as light of open oil lamp. The light of open oil lamp are groups of corporeal units with nutriment as eighth factor, produced by temperature (***utuja ojaţţhamakakalāpa***). If one can scrutinize four great elements within that light, he will 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE45

see only corporeal units called ***utuja ojaţţhamaka kalāpa***. Those are groups of corporealities with  nutriment  as  eighth  factor  which  are  proliferating  successively,  due  to  presence  of temperature called ***utu*** within each corporeal unit. When their life span come upto three-time- phases called ***uppāda-ţhiti-bhanga*** (arising-static-perishing phases) they perish away. They are groups of ***dhammas*** with very short instant life span. If benefiting factor of efficiency of the fire-element, the source, is available they arise continuously in this way. It is said as “that light of open oil lamp” by basing on single occurrence through continuity of corporealities produced by temperature of flame with momentary life-span of very short instant. Desired function  (=which  can  be  performed  by  light  of  open  oil  lamp)  is  also  capable  of accomplishing.  In the  aspect of this ***paţisandhi*** consciousness it should be recognized in similar way. (***Mahāţī-2-314***) 
PAGE45
