PAGE4466 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

**14. Conditional relations of clinging** 

These four kinds of clinging benefit 

1. fine-material and immaterial ***kammabhava***, ***upapattibhava***, 
1. sensual wholesome deed ***kammabhava*** 
1. sensual rebirth coming-into-existence, 

by efficiency of relation of determinative dependence ***(upanissayasatti)*** only. 

4. Each kind of clinging benefits unwholesome ***kammabhava***, which is associated within one mind moment, by efficiency of relations of compaţibility, mutuality, dependence, association, presence, non-disappearance, path. 

**Page-549** 

5. Each kind of clinging benefits unwholesome ***kammabhava*** which occurs asynchronously with itself, by efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only. 

**15. Way of keeping in mind causes & results** 

In  this  stage  it  is  enough  to  discern  any  kind  of  (ignorance)  craving,  clinging (formations)  action  which  is  constantly  on  one's  mind  and  cultivated  consistently  for attainment  of  future  coming-into-existence  of  ***meditator***.  All  kinds  of  actions  cultivated through out life can not be discerned thoroughly. 

There  are  variations  in  kinds  of  clinging  for  future  coming-into-existence  among practicing ***meditator***s really. Some want to become ***devas*** who is a ***dhamma*** preacher while some want to become *bhikkhu* who can propagate the admonishment of the Supreme Buddha. Some wants to accept final death as *bhikkhu* in future while some want to final death as bramaship. Thus various kinds of clinging occur among ***meditator***s. 

Therefore way of discerning in brief is as follows: 

1. ***avijjā*** (=ignorance) (20) means the nature of wrong knowing as the life of *bhikkhu* or deva preacher, 
1. ***taņhā*** (=craving) (20) means the nature of craving on the life of *bhikkhu* or deva preacher 
1. ***upādāna*** (=clinging) (20) means the nature of clinging to life of *bhikkhu* or deva preacher, (clinging to sensual desire may be more frequent.) 
1. ***sańkhāra*** (***kamma***-formation) means any kind of formations, performance of donation, restraint  with  virtue  or  meditation  practice,  which  is  cultivated,  due  to  presence  of  that clinging to sensual desire, 
1. ***kamma*** (action)*** means ***kamma*** coming-into-existence ***(kammabhava)***. 

Five  kinds  of  aggregates  of  the  life  of  *bhikkhu*  or  ***deva***  preacher,  which  will  be acquired,  due  to  that  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence,  are  rebirth  coming-into-existence.  It should be understood these ***avijjā***, ***taņhā***, ***upādāna***, ***sańkhāra***, ***kamma*** are continuities of impulsions of mind-door cognitive processes only. 

If a ***meditator*** has got absorption ***(jhāna)*** of any kind of meditation subjects, he has to discern  by  praying  to  become  ***brahma**'s*  life  which  is  worth  getting  depending  on  that absorption. Rebirth coming-into-existence called five aggregates of ***brahma*** will be found really. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  47

Due  to  variation  in  kinds  of  ***avijjā***,  ***taņhā***,  ***upādāna***,  ***sańkhāra***,  ***kamma***  among individuals,  discerning  has  to  perform  as  one's  wish  for  what  he  wants  by  taking  as  an example of life of *bhikkhu*, *deva* preacher or ***brahma*** mentioned above. 

**Page-550** 

For instance, any kind of wholesome action which is actively performed by means of clinging-to-sensual desire dor attainment of five aggregates of ***deva*** preacher in future must be taken as object again. Let us suppose \_\_\_\_\_\_ it is a wholesome volition by which flowers were offered to a pagoda. Consequence mental aggregates and corporealities produced by ***kamma***, which are resulted from efficiency of that wholesome volition, in other words, which are  resulted  from  that  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  are  rebirth  coming-into-existence ***(upapattibhava)*** indeed. 

By seeing how wholesome volition ***(=kammabhava)*** arises depending upon clinging- to-sensual desire by which five aggregates of ***deva*** preacher is clung, [=how impulsions of mind-door cognitiveprocess of action round ***(kammavaţţa)*** arises due to impulsions of mind- door cognitive process of defilements round ***(kilesa vaţţa)***.] and how rebirth coming-into- existence called five aggregates of ***deva*** preacher depending upon that ***kamma*** coming-into- existence causes and results must be kept in mind as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Due to arising of cling-to-sensual desire, ***kamma*** coming-into-existence arises. 

`    `Clinging-to-sensual desire is causal ***dhamma;*** ***Kamma*** coming-into-existence isresultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due to arising of ***kamma***-coming-into-existence, rebirth coming-into-existence arises. ***Kamma*** coming-into-existence is causal ***dhamma***; rebirth coming-into-existence is resultant ***dhamma***. 

The occurrence of sensual ***kamma*** coming-into-existence and rebirth coming-into- existence depending upon remaining three kinds of clinging must be kept in mind in similar way. If a ***meditator*** is still cultivating the seed of perfection called sensual wholesome deeds for attainment of *bhikkhu* life who can propagate noble admonishment of the Buddha in future, after selecting the most favorite sensual volition, discerning on how sensual ***kamma*** coming-into-existence and rebirth coming-into-existence occur, due to presence of clinging- to-sensual desire must be kept in mind in similar way. 

**16. Clinging-to-sensual desire and fine-material coming-into-existence** 

If  a  ***meditator***  develops  fourth  absorption  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  or  fourth absorption  of  white-***kasiņa***  ***(odātakasiņa)***  depending  upon  clinging-to-sensual  desire  by which future aggregates of ***brahma*** in fine-material sphere is clung, that concentration of fourth absorption must be entered frequently. Then by seeing occurrence of five aggregates of ***brahma*** in future through that wholesome volition of fourth absorption causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows. 

1. Due to arising ofclinging-to-sensual desire, fine-material ***kamma*** coming-into-existence arises. 

Clinging-to-sensual  desire  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  fine-material  ***kamma***  coming-into- existence is resultant ***dhamma***. 

47
PAGE4488 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

2. Due  to  arising  of  fine-material  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence,  fine-material  rebirth. Coming-into-existence arises. 

Fine-material ***kamma*** coming-into-exisrtence is causal ***dhamma***;  Fine  material rebirth coming-into-existence is resultant ***dhamma***. 
