Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE3322

***paṭisandhikkhaṇe  vipākāvyākato  eko  khandho  tiṇṇannam  khandhānam  kaṭattā  ca rūpānam sahajātapaccayena paccayo. (Paṭṭhāna-1-140)*** 

It is right. – As the fact, during life both three kinds of consequence, indeterminate mental aggregates (***vipāka avyākata nāmakkhandhā***) and CPM (***cittajarūpa***) are produced by  consequence  indeterminate  consciousness  (***vipāka***  ***avyākata***  ***viññāṇa***)  in  ***Paṭṭhāna***, similarly\_\_\_\_\_ during ***paṭisandhi*** consequence,  indeterminate consciousness benefits both three kinds of mental aggregates and CPK (***kaṭattā rūpa*** = ***kammaja rūpa***) by means of efficiency of relation of compatibility. (***Abhi-A-2-164***) 

Furthermore in this ***Pāli Text*** of ***Paṭiccasamuppāda Vibhanga***, the Supreme Buddha who preached that ***viññāṇa*** ***paccayā*** ***nāmarūpam*** = due to arising of consciousness, mind- matter arise, revolved the Incomparable Supreme Wheel of ***Dhamma*** which is not revolved opposite nature by anyone, ***samaṇa*** (one who is designated as Noble-one), or ***brahmaṇa*** (one who is designated as righteous and purified person), or ***deva*** or ***māra*** (evil heavenly being), or ***brahma*** in the world because in the aspect of ultimate nature, only mind-matter is worth seeing but not being, man, in the insight of virtuous wise person who can discern and keep in mind that nature by experiential right view knowledge. (***Abhi-A-2-164***) 

A  practicing  ***meditator***  sees  the  phenomenon,  “due  to  consciousness,  only  mind- matter arise”, but not arising of person or being by right view knowledge. Therefore the Supreme Buddha who preached that “***viññāṇa*** ***paccayā*** ***nāmarūpam*** = due to consciousness, mind-matter arise”, preached the same meaning that there is no being, person but mind- matter only due to arising of consciousness. That way of preaching can not be opposite or rejected by anyone. Therefore the Supreme Buddha who preached the phenomenon of arising of mind-matter, due to consciousness, set in motion well the Incomparable Supreme Wheel of ***Dhamma***. It is right – Revolving and occurring wheel of ***Dhamma*** shows the occurrence of void of self (***atta***) indeed. This is the essence of commentary indeed. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-116***) 

**PAGE-478** 

In the next method – by means of the noble preaching, ***viññāṇa paccayā*** ***nāmarūpam***, which directs the fact that “there are mind-matter only”, it is shown the fact incessant arising mind-matter are the Noble Truth of Suffering (***dukkha sacca***). Due to direct showing on the Noble  Truth  of  Suffering,  the  craving  (=  the  Noble  Truth  of  Cause  of  Suffering  called ***samudayasacca***), which is the origin of that Noble Truth of Suffering, has also been shown through the preaching methodology called ***phalūpacāra*** (= metaphorical usage by which the result is said directly but the cause can also be inferred indirectly.) Both the Noble Truth of Cessation of Suffering (***nirodha sacca***) which is the factor to cease those sufferings and the Noble Truth of Course Leading to the Cessation of Suffering (***magga sacca***) have also been shown  through  inevitable  method  called  ***avinābhāvanaya***.  This  is  because  –  there  is  no ***dukkha  sacca***  ***dhamma***  which  lacks  any  cause  and  there  is  no  resultant  ***dukkha  sacca*** ***dhamma*** which does not cease, due to cessation of causal ***samudaya sacca*** ***dhamma*** and then due  to  direct  preaching  on  ***dukkha  sacca***,  the  craving  (=  the  Noble  Truth  of  Cause  of Suffering called ***samudaya sacca***), which is the origin of that Noble Truth of Suffering, has also been shown through the preaching methodology called ***phalūpacāra***. Furthermore due to occurrence  of  non-deserving  to  attain  ***nirodha  sacca***  ***dhamma***,  which  is  the  factor  of cessation of ***dukkha sacca*** and ***samudaya sacca*** in the absence of the causal ***magga sacca***, both kinds of Noble Truths, ***nirodha*** and ***magga***, have also been shown really. The noble preaching  which  shows  Four  Noble  Truths  is  ***dhammacakkapavattana  sutta***  (Setting  in Motion the Wheel of Truth) indeed. It is right – Obvious showing on Four Noble Truths, such 
PAGE31

as “***idam dukkham ariyasaccanti me bhikkhave***” etc., in the ***Dhammacakkapavattana Sutta***, is  preached  in  a  way  that  “***anuttaram  dhamma  cakkam  pavattitam***  =  the  Incomparable Supreme Wheel of ***Dhamma*** is worth setting motion well.” (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-116, 117***) 

**PAGE-479** 

**2.7 *nāmarūpa* *paccayā salāyatanam* = due to arising of mind-matter, six-bases arise                                  *Pāli Quotation* (*Abhi-A-2-165, Vs-2-196*)** 

The term, ***nāma*** (mind), must be inferred as three mental aggregates called feeling- aggregate, perception-aggregate, formation-aggregate. 

The term, ***rūpa*** (matter), must be inferred as four kinds of great elements, six base- corporeality, vital-controlling faculty, which always benefit six-bases certainly, which are inclusive in the continuity of aggregates of oneself. 

The term, ***salāyatana*** (six-bases), must be inferred as six-bases called eye-base, ear-base, nose-base, tongue-base, body-base, mind-base (***manāyatana***). 

The mind-matter, which is collective noun deriving from canceling out to remain one of (***ekases***) these words, “***nāmañca rūpañca nāmarūpañca nāmarūpam***” can benefit for arising of six-bases which is also collective out deriving from canceling out to remain one of these  words,  as  “***chaṭṭhāyatanañca  saļāyatanañca  saļāyatanam***”.  Three  kinds  of  mental aggregates existing in  Immaterial Sphere benefit for arising of sixth base (= mind-base). Therefore  ***saļāyatana***  (base)  is  a  designation  resulting  from  collection  and  cancellation. (***Abhi-A-2-165, Vs-2-196***) 

**2.7.1 Explanations**  

1. Four great elements benefit eye-base, ear-base, nose-base, tongue-base, body-base which are  existing  within  the  same  corporeal  units  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of compatibility, dependence, presence, non-disappearance. 
1. Among  (6)  kinds  of  base-corporeality,  during  ***paṭisandhi***,  the  heart-base  benefits ***paṭisandhi*** mind-base by means of efficiency of relations of compatibility, dependence, mutuality, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. 
1. During  life,  the  heart-base  benefits  mind-element  (***manodhātu***),  mind-consciousness- element  (***manoviññāṇadhātu***)  including  life-continuum  by  means  of  efficiency  of relation  of  pre-compatibility,  dependence,  dissociation,  presence,  non-disappearance. (During life mind-element and mind-consciousness-element do not depend on the heart- base  which  arises  simultaneously  with  themselves  but  on  the  heart-base  which  arose simultaneously with contiguous preceding mind-moment, resulting in in-availability to efficiency of relation of compatibility.) 
1. Eye-base-corporeality,  ear-base-corporeality,  nose-base-corporeality,  tongue-base- corporeality, body-base-corporeality benefit mind-base called their respective fivefold- consciousness  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of  basic  pre-compatible  controlling faculty (***vatthupure jātindriyapaccaya***). 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE34

5. Physical vitality benefits CPK (***kammajarūpa***) within same corporeal unit by means of efficiency of relations of controlling faculty, presence, non-disappearance. (***Anuṭī-2-130***) 

Thus  four  great  elements,  six  base-corporeality  physical  vitality  benefit  six-bases which  are  still  arising  certainly  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of  compatibility, dependence, pre-compatibility, controlling faculty accordingly. 

**PAGE-480** 

Those  objects,  visible-base  etc,  also  benefit  mind-base  by  means  of  efficiency  of relations  of  object,  pre-compatibility  etc.  However,  those  visible-object  etc,  which  are relation of object, have neither compatible occurrence with respective mind-bases which are owner of object (***ārammaṇika***) and resultant ***dhammas***, depended occurrence of mind-bases, as  base-corporealities,  eye-base-corporeality  etc.,  nor  protective  occurrence (***anupālanabhāva***) of corporealities within the same corporeal unit, as physical vitality. In the causal ***dhamma*** called ***nāmarūpa***, the term, ***rūpa*** (=matter), is not inferred as visible-object etc. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-117***) 

It will be continued – those external bases, visible-base etc, benefit mind-base by means of efficiency of relations of object, object-pre-compatibility (***ārammaṇa purejāta***). However those are not ***dhammas*** which are inclusive in the continuity of oneself only as internal bases, eye-base etc, but might also be inclusive in the continuity of others (***para santatipariyāpanna = aññasantati pariyāpanna***). External bases which are existing in the continuities of both oneself and others and external bases which are inclusive in continuities of non-living things can benefit for arising of mind-base by means of efficiency of relation of object,  object-pre-compatibility  etc,  really.  Those  corporeal  ***dhammas***  preached  in  this section of Dependence-Origination, actually, are only corporealities, which are inclusive in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of oneself, which are connected and descended from the  relation,  ***avijjā  paccayā***  ***saṅkhāra***  (=  due  to  arising  of  ignorance,  formations  arise). Because it is impossible to rule fixed law in a way that only corporeal ***dhamma*** which is inclusive in continuity of corporeality-mentality of oneself, is the causal ***dhamma***, relating to the term, ***rūpa*** (matter) in the relation, ***nāmarūpa paccayā*** ***saļāyatanam*** (= due to arising of mind-matter, six-bases arise), visible-object etc., must not be inferred in this case. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2- 117***) 

Furthermore when base-corporealities, eye-base etc., benefit mind-base which is consisting in six-bases, they relates with only one function. For instance, when eye-base benefits the mind- base  called  seeing-consciousness  it  always  relates  with  the  strict  function  of  seeing (***dassanakicca***) only. It should be recognized similarly on the relation between ear-base etc., and mind-base called hearing-consciousness etc. It always benefits through only strict single function (***niyama***) in this way. 

When visible-base, visible-object etc., benefit mind-base, actually, it is not always benefits through strict single function only. Various kinds of efficiency called visible-object, audible-object,  olfactory-object,  gustative-object  (sapid-object),  tactile-object,  ideational- object (***dhammārammaṇa***), also benefit mind-base. Because the way of relation is not strict single (***niyama***) definitely, those external-bases, visible-object etc, are not put in the ***rūpa*** (matter) according to the phrase, ***nāmarūpapaccaya***. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-117, Mahāṭī-2-321, Anuṭī-2- 130***) 

**2.7.2. Way of inference in the next method** 
PAGE33

***niyamato  cattāribhūtāni  cha  vatthuni  jīvitindriyanti  evanti  ettha  ‘evam’  –  saddena  vā rūpāyatanādīnampi sangaho daṭṭhabbo. (Mūlaṭī-2-117, Mahāṭī-2-321)*** 

In this way of inference, in the phrase, ***nāmarūpa*** ***paccaya***, the term, ***rūpa*** (matter), must be inferred as visible-object etc also. It must be inferred indiscriminately through the word, evam, which is found in “***jīvitindriyanti evam***” explained by the commentary. 

**PAGE-481** 

That  word,  ***evam***,  has  the  meaning  called  varieties  (***pakāra***).  It  means  various  kinds  of corporeal  ***dhammas***  which  are  basic  meaning  of  the  term,  “***rūpa***”  found  in  the  words, ***viññāṇapaccaya***  ***nāmarūpam***,  must  be  inferred  as  the  basic  meaning  of  the  term,  ***rūpa*** (matter) found in these words, “ ***nāmarūpa paccayā*** ***saļāyatanam***, also through the term, ***evam*** which has that meaning, varieties (***pakāra***). This is the way of inference which is not opposite to the explanation of commentary. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-117, Mahāṭī-2-321***) 

3. **The basic meaning of the word, *manāyatana* (mind-base) *Pāli Quotation* (*Abhi-A-2-165, Abhi-2-187) (Mūlaṭī-2-118*)** 

The words, ***nāmapaccayā*** ***chaṭṭhāyatanam*** = due to arising of the mind called mental concomitants, the sixth-base = mind-base (***manāyatana***) arise, includes in both unwholesome section (***akusala vāra***) and wholesome section (***kusala vāra***). In this preaching methodology of ***Suttantabhājanīya***, however, it should be recognized only these words, “ ***nāmapaccayā*** ***chaṭṭhāyatanam***,” which are concerning with consequence and including in ***avyākatavāra*** (indeterminate section), are extracted as example in order to be understood on the fact “ consequence sixth-base = mind-base only must be inferred.” 

Furthermore in the section of ***paccayanaya***, which shows how conditional relations occur, it is explained that— 

***avipākam  pana  avipākassa  chaṭṭhassa  avakamsatova  tato  vipākapaccayam  apanetvā chadhāva paccayo hoti. (Abhi-A-2-166)*** 

= Three kinds of wholesome mental aggregates which are not consequence benefit wholesome  mind-base  which  is  not  consequence;  three  kinds  of  unwholesome  mental aggregates  which  are  not  consequence  benefit  unwholesome  mind-base  which  is  not consequence; three kinds of mere functioning mental aggregates which are not consequence benefit mere functioning mind-base which is not consequence; by means of efficiency of (6) kinds of relations. 

In  this  way  the  phenomena,  how  conditional  relations  (***paccayanaya***)  occur,  are extracted as examples. It should be recognized those phenomena, how conditional relations occur, are extracted as examples in order that all kinds of ultimate ***dhammas*** are explicit without any remainder. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-118***) 

In accordance with of this explanation of ***Mūlaṭīkā***, it should be understood similarly in every case. If causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are kept in mind and ***vipassanā*** practice is performed with the purpose not to remain ultimate elements, after understanding the fact wholesome, unwholesome and mere functioning ***dhammas*** are not inclusive in consequence round (***vipāka*** ***vaṭṭa***), it will not be disadvantages. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE36

4. **Why it can be known?** 

There is a question why it can be known the fact mind-matter benefit six-bases. The answer is that it can be known because when mind-matter arise six-bases arise consequently. 

**PAGE-482** 

If obvious occurrence of either various mind (***nāma***) or various matters (***rūpa***) are present, various kinds of bases (***āyatana***) arise  apparently. Unless obvious occurrence of either various mind (***nāma***) or various matters are present, various kinds of bases (***āyatana***) can not arise apparently. That principle called usual occurrence of those six-bases, due to arising of those mind-matter, will be clear in the section showing how conditional relations occur. (***Abhi-A-2-165, Vs-2-196***) 

5. **How conditional relations occur**  
1. **How the mind (*nāma*) benefits six-bases** 

\1.  In  Immaterial  Sphere,  during ***paṭisandhi***, ***paṭisandhi***  mental  concomitants  called  mind benefit ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness (= mind-base) by means of efficiency of at least (7) kinds of relations,  viz.,  compatibility,  mutuality,  dependence,  association,  ***kamma***-consequence, presence, non-disappearance. 

Among  immaterial  consequence  mental  concomitants  called  mind,  some  mind  called **greedlessness, hatelessness**, non-delusion (***a-lobha-a-dosa-a-moha***) can benefit associating consequence mind-base by means of efficiency of relation of root (hetu***paccaya***) (during both ***paṭisandhi*** and life). Those mental factors (***nāma āhāra***) called contact (***phassa***), volition (***cetanā***)  can  benefit  mind-base  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of  nutriment (***āhārapaccaya***). Therefore when it is benefited by the relation of root there are (8) kinds of relations and when it is benefited by the relation of nutriment there are (9) kinds of relations. (***Abhi-A-2-165, Vs-2-196***) 

In  sub-commentaries  called  ***Mūlaṭī***-***2-118,  Mahāṭī-2-322***,  it  is  shown  maximum relations  that  there  are  (10)  kinds  of  relations  with  referring  to  the  time  when  mental concomitants, which are worth designating as mental controlling faculties, (= mental vital controlling faculty, neutral controlling faculty, controlling faculty of faith, controlling faculty of effort, controlling faculty of mindfulness, controlling faculty of concentration, controlling faculty of knowledge) benefit associating mind-base by means of efficiency of relation of controlling faculty. 

In  those  Immaterial  Sphere,  during  life,  consequence  mental  concomitants  called mind group benefit associating consequence mind-base by means of efficiency mentioned above only. 

2. **Instructions of the most Venerable *Pyi Sayadaw*** 
1. By the time, greedlessness, hatelessness are occurring,(7) kinds of relations, compatibility etc, are added with the relation of root, resulting in (8) kinds of relations. 
1. By the time, nutriment of contact (***phassāhāra***) is also occurring, previous (7) kinds of relations are added with the relation of nutriment, resulting in (8) kinds of relations. 
PAGE35

3. By the time, volitional nutriment is occurring, previous (7) kinds of relations are added with  relations  of  compatible  action  (***sahajāta***  ***kamma***)  and  compatible  nutriment (***sahajāta*** ***āhāra***), resulting in (9) kinds of relations. 
3. By the time, non-delusion is occurring, previous (7) kinds of relations are added with relations of root, controlling faculty, path (***magga paccaya***), resulting in (10) kinds of relations. Thus it should be inferred accordingly. 

This is the instruction found in **Myanma Translation of *Visuddhi Magga* (*Phyi-4-167*)**, translated by the most Venerable ***Pyi Sayadaw***. 

In the sub-commentary called ***Anuṭīkā*** ***(2-130)***, however, the relation of absorption (***jhāna  paccaya***)  is  also  explained  that  “***jhānādīnampi  vasena  veditabbo***”.  It  should  be inferred by scrutinizing variation of numbers of relations within the range of at least (7) kinds and the maximum, (10) kinds of relations accordingly. 

**PAGE-483** 

2. In  Five-groups-existence,  during  ***paṭisandhi***,  mental  concomitants  called  mind  group become  association  of  heart-base  and  then  those  benefit  associating  ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness called mind-base by means of efficiency of at least (7) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence, association, ***kamma***-consequence, presence, non-disappearance. (***Abhi-A-2-166, Vs-2-197***) 

In this case, with regarding to the words, “become association of heart-base,” it shows only this meaning that mental concomitants called mind-group are not lacking association as Immaterial Sphere, the heart-base, together with mental concomitants called mind-group, also benefits ***paṭisandhi***  mind-base.  Actually,  the  meaning,  “as  heart-base benefits  mind-base, mental concomitants called mind-group also benefit mind-base”, should not be desired (= inferred).  Why  it  should  not  be  desired  ?  Heart-base  benefits  mind-base  by  means  of efficiency of relation of dissociation (***vippayutta*** ***paccaya***). Mental concomitants called mind- group, actually, do not benefit mind-base by means of efficiency of relation of dissociation (but by means of efficiency of relation of association only). Furthermore mental concomitants called  mind-group  benefit  mind-base  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of  ***kamma***- consequence,  root  etc.  Heart-base,  actually,  does  not  benefits  mind-base  by  means  of efficiency of relations of ***kamma***-consequence, root etc. This is the reason why the meaning mentioned above should not be desired. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-118, Mahāṭī-2-322***) 

3. During ***paṭisandhi*** of **Spontaneous born beings** (***opapātika satta***), those consequence mental concomitants called mind-group benefit (5) kinds of bases, viz., eye-base, ear- base, nose-base, tongue-base, body-base, other than mind-base, by means of efficiency of 

(6) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, dependence, ***kamma***-consequence, dissociation, presence,  non-disappearance  after  associating  with  four  great  elements.  [It  should  be recognized it refers especially those beings, spontaneous born etc, who have got those bases which are simultaneous arising with ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness.] 

Among these ***paṭisandhi*** mind-groups, some mental ***dhammas*** called greedlessness, hatelessness,  non-delusion  can  benefit  ***paṭisandhi***  consequence  mind-base  by  means  of efficiency of relation of root and some mental ***dhammas*** called contact, volition can benefit ***paṭisandhi*** consequence mind-base by means of efficiency of relation of nutriment. In this way it should be recognized on range of variation of relations. (***Abhi-A-2-166***) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE38

4. **In five-group-existence**, during life, as occurring in during ***paṭisandhi***, each consequence mental  concomitants  called  mind-group  which  associate  with  various  consequence consciousness  called  life-continuum,  fivefold-consciousness,  receiving,  investigating, registering, death, benefit respective associating consequence consciousness mind-base by means of efficiency of at least (7) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence, association, ***kamma***-consequence, presence, non-disappearance. (It might be related with efficiency of relations of root, nutriment also.). (***Abhi-A-2-166***) 

**A.  Non-consequence mind-group—non-consequence mind-base** 

5. Non-consequence  mind-group  benefit  non-consequence  mind-base (***avapākamanāyatana***) as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 
1) Wholesome mental concomitants mind-group benefit wholesome consciousness = mind- base; 
1) Unwholesome mental concomitants mind-group benefit unwholesome consciousness = mind-base; 
1) Mere  functioning  mental  concomitants  mind-group  benefit  mere  functioning consciousness = mind-base 

**PAGE- 484** 

by means of efficiency of at least (6) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence, association, presence, non-disappearance. It should be recognized efficiency of those relations, root and nutriment can also benefit in maximum range of variation of relations as mentioned above. (***Abhi-A-2-166, Vs-2-197***) 

4) It is intended to be without remainder  

Wholesome,  unwholesome  and  mere  fuctioning  ***dhammas***  are  called  non- consequence ***dhamma*** (***avipāka*** ***dhamma***). According to the term, ***manāyatana*** (mind-base) only  consequence  consciousness  must  be  inferred  through  preaching  methodology  of ***Suttanta***. Wholesome, unwholesome and mere functioning ***dhammas*** are not inclusive in mind-base. In this case, it should be recognized the reason why the ways of benefiting of respective  associating  non-consequence  mental  concomitants  called  mind  group  for  non- consequence wholesome, unwholesome and mere functioning mind-base, are extracted and shown in that during keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** by seeing the nature of causal relationship of consequence mind-group during life, it is intended to show conditional relations of all kinds of ultimate elements without any remainder by putting wholesome, unwholesome, and mere functioning ***dhammas*** which are occurring in the interval of those consequence mental ***dhammas*** within single continuity of cognitive process. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-118***) 

The righteous ***meditator*** should like to take the object of continuity of mind-moments of cognitive processes in sequence. The mere functioning five-doors-adverting consciousness lies between life-continuum and fivefold consciousness. Furthermore the mere functioning determining consciousness and wholesome, unwholesome (mere functioning) impulsions lie accordingly between consequence investigating and registering consciousness, for five-doors- cognitive processes. In mind-door cognitive processes, mere functioning mind-door adverting consciousness and wholesome, unwholesome (mere functioning) impulsions lie accordingly 
PAGE37

previous to consequence registering consciousness. If causal relationship and efficiency of conditional  relations  of  consequence  mind  group  and  consequent  mind-base  is  shown selectively, causal relationship and efficiency of conditional relations of those wholesome, unwholesome (mere functioning) impulsions and adverting consciousness will be left remain. It means that all kinds of ultimate ***dhammas*** are shown thoroughly not to be left any remain in that way. Therefore if those wholesome, unwholesome and mere functioning ***dhammas*** are also  kept  in  mind  minglingly  there  will  be  no  disadvantage  really.  However  those wholesome, unwholesome impulsions include in the list of ***kamma*** coming-into-existence (***kammabhava***) which are present causal ***dhammas***. It should be recognized those are not inclusive in the list of six-bases, in the next method, in the list of mind-base through ***Suttanta*** method. Mere functioning impulsions occur only in the continuum of Arahant but not in the continuums of worldlings and ***sekkha ariya*** (still practicing to attain the fruit-Knowledge of Arahant). Therefore in the continuum of righteous ***meditator*** who is only worldling person, only mere functioning consciousness called five-doors-adverting, determining, mind-door- adverting can arise really. 

6. In  that  five-groups-existence,  during  life,  consequence  mind-group  called  fivefold- consciousness  which  arise  depending  on  base-corporealities,  eye-base  etc.,  and consequence  mind-group  called  life-continuum,  receiving,  investigating,  registering consciousness, which arise depending upon heart-base, benefit eye-base, ear-base, nose- base, tongue-base, body-base by means of efficiency of (4) kinds of relations  called post- compatibility, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. (***Abhi-A-2-166***) 
6. In  that  five-groups-existence,  during  life,  non-consequence  mind-group  called wholesome, unwholesome, mere functioning also benefit those eye-base, ear-base, nose- base, tongue-base, body-base by means of efficiency of (4) kinds of relations called post- compatibility, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. (***Abhi-A-2-166***) 

**PAGE-485** 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_\_ If above number (6) and (7) are added, mental ***dhammas*** of both five-doors- cognitive processes and mind-door-cognitive process together with life-continuum, which are deserving to occur the relation of post-compatibility, are already finished. During life, mental ***dhammas*** benefit CPK (***kammajarūpa***) called eye-base, ear-base, nose-base, tongue-base, body-base, which are still reaching into the static phase (***ṭhiti***) by means of efficiency of relations of post-compatibility etc. They do not benefit CPK which are still reaching into the arising phase (***uppāda***) as ***paṭisandhi*** mental ***dhamma***. Therefore, wholesome, unwholesome, consequence, mere functioning mind groups, which are consisting in five-doors-cognitive processes, eye-door-cognitive process etc., and mind-door-cognitive process, benefit eye-base etc., by means of efficiency of relations of post-compatibility, dissociation, presence, non- disappearance.  (It  should  be  recognized  those  do  not  benefit  eye-base  etc,  by  means  of efficiency  of  relations  of  compatibility,  pre-compatibility.)  (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-118,  Mahāṭī-2-322, Anuṭī-2-131***) 

This is the section showing how mind-group, according to the term, ***nāma*** (mind- group),  benefit  appropriately  (6)  kinds  of  bases,  according  to  the  term,  ***saļāyatana***  (six- bases), in the conditional relation called “***nāmarūpapaccaya*** ***saļāyatanam***.” Now it will be continued to present how the matter-group, according to the term, ***rūpa***m (matter), benefit (6) kinds of bases. 

(e). Way of benefiting of the matter for six-bases 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE40

1. In the conditional relation called ***nāmarūpa paccayā*** ***saļāyatanam***, during ***paṭisandhi***, the heart-base benefits ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness called mind-base by means of efficiency of 

   6) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. (***Abhi-A-2-166, Vs-2-198***) 
1. If it is said generally, either during ***paṭisandhi*** or during life, such such base arises; (5) kinds of corporeal bases, eye-base etc, within the same corporeal unit, which arise by means  of  that  that  base,  are  benefited  by  (4)  kinds  of  **great  elements**  by  means  of efficiency  of  (4)  kinds  of  relations,  viz.,  compatibility,  dependence,  presence,  non- disappearance. [It should be understood the fact four  great elements benefit eye-base within  the  same  corporeal  unit by  means  of  efficiency  of  (4)  kinds  of  relations  etc.] (***Abhi-A-2-166, 167, Vs-2-198***) 
1. Either during ***paṭisandhi*** or during life, (5) kinds of corporeal bases, eye-base etc., are benefited by physical vitality which is simultaneous arising with those bases, within the same corporeal unit, by means of efficiency of (3) kinds of relations, viz., presence, non- disappearance, controlling faculty. (***Abhi-A-2- 167, Vs-2-198***) 
1. If the digestive five-element (***pācakatejor***) which is capable of digesting food is available, the nutriment (***ojā***) consisting in the pure-octad produced by temperature, which is called ingested  nourishment  (***kabaļīkāra  āhāra***),  produces  new  generations  of  pure-octad produced by nutriment. Those are corporealities with eighth factor nutriment produced by nutriment (***āhāraja ojāṭṭhamaka rūpa***). 

**PAGE-486** 

Those  corporealities  are  spreading  throughout  body  by  means  of  production  of generation by  generation.  The  nutriment  consisting in  those  corporeal  units  is  called  the nutriment produced by nutriment (***āhāraja*** ***ojā***). It is called ***kabaļīkāra āhāra***.  

In other words, various nutriments produced by four origins (***catusamuṭṭhānika ojā***) which is available to attain supporting factor of nutriment produced by nutriment (***āhāraja ojā***) is called  ***kabaļīkāraāhāra***.  That  nutriment  so-called  ***kabaļīkāraāhāra***  benefits  (5)  kinds  of bases, eye-base etc., by means of efficiency of (3) kinds of relations, viz., presence, non- disappearance, nutriment (***āhārapaccaya***). This way of benefiting (relation) can occur in the body, which is always followed by (= supported by) nourishment, of those beings who exist depending on nourishment, during life only but not during ***paṭisandhi***. (***Abhi-A-2-167, Vs-2- 198***) 

[Notes:\_\_\_\_\_ The nutriment produced by nutriment called ***kabaļīkāra*** ***āhāra*** benefits those kinds of nutriments, nutriment produced by ***kamma*** (***kammaja ojā***) etc., which are consisting in various kinds of corporeal units by means of efficiency of relations of presence, non- disappearance, nutriment, resulting in proliferation of new generations of corporealities with nutriment as eighth factor (***ojāṭṭhamaka*** ***rūpa***). Due to proliferation of corporealities in that way, corporeal ***dhammas*** become stronger and stronger, resulting in durability and stability. Because the nutriment produced by nutriment  supports various nutriments within various decads, eye-decad etc, new generations of corporeal units with nutriment as eighth factor are proliferating and then corporeal ***dhammas*** together with nutriment which are consisting in various corporeal units, eye-decad etc., are durable and stable consequently. It can therefore be said the nutriment benefits eye-decad etc., by means of efficiency of relation of nutriment.  
PAGE39

It can be noticed the fact if appropriate medicines, such as Vitamin A containing tablets, are taken as nourishment, the sight usually becomes powerful. While both causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are present apparently it (appropriate medicine) benefits the sight by means of efficiency of relation of nutriment.] 

6. **Way of benefiting of matter for mind-base** 
1. **Eye-base-corporeality** benefits the mind-base called seeing-consciousness; 
1. **Ear-base-corporeality** benefits the mind-base called hearing-consciousness; 
1. **Nose-base-corporeality** benefits the mind-base called smelling-consciousness; 
1. **Tongue-base-corporeality** benefits the mind-base called tasting-consciousness; 
1. **Body-base-corporeality** benefits the mind-base called touching-consciousness; 

by  means  of  efficiency  of  (6)  kinds  of  relations,  viz.,  dependence,  pre-compatibility, controlling faculty, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance, during life only, but not during  ***paṭisandhi***.  (During  ***paṭisandhi***,  actually,  fivefold  consciousness,  seeing consciousness etc., are not arising instant but ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness only.) (***Abhi-A-2- 167, Vs-2-198***) 

6. **Heart-base** benefits all kinds of mind-bases, except fivefold consciousness, by means of efficiency  of  (5)  kinds  of  relations,  viz.,  dependence,  pre-compatibility,  dissociation, presence,  non-disappearance,  during  life  but  not  during  ***paṭisandhi***  in  five-groups- existence. (Way of benefiting during ***paṭisandhi*** has been presented above previously.) (***Abhi-A-2-167, Vs-2-198***) 

**PAGE-487** 

7. **Way of benefiting of mind-matter for six-bases** 

a.  In five-groups-existence, during ***paṭisandhi***, mental concomitants called three kinds of mental aggregates (if it is joyful ***paṭisandhi*** with three roots called ***tihetuka somanassa paṭisandhi***,  there  are  (33)  mental  concomitants)  and  heart-base,  which  are  co-called mind-matter  benefit  the  mind-base  called  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  by  means  of efficiency  of  relations  of  compatibility,  mutuality,  dependence,  ***kamma***-consequence, association, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance etc. These are trace only. (***Abhi-A- 2-167, Vs-2-199***) 

Among these kinds of relations, relations of compatibility, mutuality, dependence, presence, non-disappearance etc., concern with both kinds of mind and matter which benefit mind-base. 

Those  kinds  of  relations,  viz.,  association,  ***kamma***-consequence,  root,  nutriment, controlling faculty etc., concern with mental concomitants called mind-group which benefit mind-base. 

The  relation  of  dissociation  concerns  with  the  causal  ***dhamma***,  heart-base  which benefits mind-base. Thus it should be differentiated and paralleled appropriately. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2- 118, Mahāṭī-2-323, Anuṭī-2-131***) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE42

8. **Way of benefiting of matter for (5) kinds of corporeal bases** 
1. Four great elements corporeal ***dhammas*** consisting in the eye-decad benefit the eye-base within the same corporeal unit; 
1. Four great elements corporeal ***dhammas*** consisting in the ear-decad benefit the ear-base within the same corporeal unit; 
1. Four great elements corporeal ***dhammas*** consisting in the nose-decad benefit the nose- base within the same corporeal unit; 
1. Four  great  elements  corporeal  ***dhammas***  consisting  in  the  tongue-decad  benefit  the tongue-base within the same corporeal unit; 
1. Four great elements corporeal ***dhammas*** consisting in the body-decad benefit the body- base within the same corporeal unit; 
1. Physical  vitality  consisting  in  the  eye-decad  benefits  the  eye-base  within  the  same corporeal unit; 
1. Physical  vitality  consisting  in  the  ear-decad  benefits  the  ear-base  within  the  same corporeal unit; 
1. Physical  vitality  consisting  in  the  nose-decad  benefits  the  nose-base  within  the  same corporeal unit; 
1. Physical vitality consisting in the tongue-decad benefits the tongue-base within the same corporeal unit; 
1. Physical vitality consisting in the body-decad benefits the body-base within the same corporeal unit; 

by means of efficiency of relations of compatibility, dependence, dissociation, controlling- faculty, presence, non-disappearance. This way of benefiting is explained with the purpose of referring how corporeal ***dhammas*** benefit (5) kinds of corporeal bases during entering into the Cessation Absorption (***nirodha samāpatti***). However it should be recognized the fact because  this  way  of  benefiting  does  not  concern  with  common  people  (the  righteous ***meditator*** also), it is not shown in ***Pāli Text***, but showing apparently the fact, mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***  not  only  during ***paṭisandhi***, but  also  during  life, by  following   general preaching methodology only.  (***Mahāṭī***-***2-323***) 

9. **Way of keeping in mind causal and resultant *dhammas*** 

In  this  section,  according  to  these  Conditional  Relations,  ***nāmarūpa***  ***paccayā*** ***saļāyatanam***, \_\_ there are three divisions, viz.,  1. how mind group benefit six-bases;  

2. how matter benefits six-bases;  
2. how mind-matter benefit six-bases. 

**PAGE-488** 
PAGE41

If those divisions are sub-divided, it will be (5) sub-divisions as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Due to arising of mind-group, how mind-base arises; 
1. Due to arising of mind-group, how corporeal bases arise; 
1. Due to arising of matter, how mind-base arises; 
1. Due to arising of matter, how corporeal bases arise; 
1. Due  to  arising  of  mind-matter,  how  mind-base  arises.  Now  it  will  be  presented significantly on the way of discerning which concerns with mankind as an example of a gentleman who has got joyful ***paṭisandhi*** with three roots by following those (5) kinds of sub-divisions.\_\_\_\_\_ 

**(i)1. Due to arising of mind-group, how mind-base arises** 

Among associating mental ***dhammas*** within one mind-moment, mental concomitants are inferred as mind-group (***nāma***), while the consciousness, as the mind-base (***manāyatana***) respectively.  Previously  associating  mental  ***dhammas***  within  one  mind-moment  must  be differentiated and kept in mind. Then the phenomenon how consciousness called mind-base arises,  due  to  arising  of  mental  concomitants  called  mind-group,  must  be  scrutinized  by insight. Afterwards causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind. 

For example – if causal and resultant ***dhammas*** within ***paṭisandhi*** mind-moment are intended to be kept in mind, (34) associating mental ***dhammas*** within ***paṭisandhi*** mind-moment must be  kept  in  mind  previously.  Afterwards  the  phenomenon  how  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness called mind-base arises, due to arising of mind-group must be scrutinized by insight and causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows:\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Due to arising of (33) kinds of ***paṭisandhi*** mind-group, ***paṭisandhi*** mind-base arises. (33) kinds of ***paṭisandhi*** mind-group are causal ***dhammas***; ***paṭisandhi*** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. (It should not be forgotten the fact this phenomenon of benefiting is performed by association with the heart-base) 
1. Due to arising of (33) kinds of ***bhavanga*** mind-group, ***bhavanga*** mind-base arises. (33) kinds of ***bhavanga*** mind-group are causal ***dhammas***; ***bhavanga*** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of (33) kinds of ***cuti* (death)** mind-group, ***cuti* (death)**mind-base arises. 

   33) kinds of ***cuti* (death)**mind-group are causal ***dhammas***; ***cuti* (death)** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of (10) kinds of **five-doors-adverting**, **five-doors-adverting** mind-base arises. (10) kinds of **five-doors-adverting** are causal ***dhammas***; **five-doors-adverting** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of (7) kinds of **seeing-consciousness**, **seeing-consciousness** mind-base arises.  (7)  kinds  of  **seeing-consciousness**  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  **seeing-consciousness** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  (10)  kinds  of  **receiving**,  **receiving**  mind-base  arises.  (10)  kinds **receiving** are causal ***dhammas***; **receiving** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-489** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

7. Due to arising of (11) kinds of **investigating**, **investigating** mind-base arises. (11) kinds of **investigating** are causal ***dhammas***; **investigating** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
7. Due to arising of (11) kinds of **determining**, **determining** mind-base arises. (11) kinds of **determining** are causal ***dhammas***; **determining** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
7. Due to arising of (33) kinds of **impulsion**, **impulsion** mind-base arises. (33) kinds of **impulsion** are causal ***dhammas***; **impulsion** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. (Seven times of impulsions must be discerned separately.) 
7. Due to arising of (33) kinds of **registering**, **registering** mind-base arises. (33) kinds of **registering**  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  **registering**  mind-base  is  resultant  ***dhamma***.  (Two times of registering must be discerned separately.) 
7. Due to arising of (11) kinds of **mind-door-adverting**, **mind-door-adverting** mind-base arises. (11) kinds of **mind-door-adverting** are causal ***dhammas***; **mind-door-adverting** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
7. Due to arising of (33) kinds of **impulsion**, **impulsion** mind-base arises. (33) kinds of **impulsion** are causal ***dhammas***; **impulsion** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. (Seven times of impulsions must be discerned separately.) 
7. Due to arising of (33) kinds of **registering**, **registering** mind-base arises. (33) kinds of **registering**  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  **registering**  mind-base  is  resultant  ***dhamma***.  (Two times of registering must be discerned separately.) 

These  are  showing  how  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  arise  within  every  mind- moment in the first row of eye-door-cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process in which  wholesome  impulsions  fall  by  taking  visible-object,  as  shown  in  Tables  of ***nāmakammaṭṭhāna***, **Volume II**. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of every mind-moment for each row must be kept in mind by taking example of these ways. Those eye-door-cognitive processes  and  mind-door-cognitive processes  with  which  unwholesome  impulsions  called unwholesome  groups  must also be discerned in similar way. Remaining doors,  ear-door- cognitive process etc. , must be discerned in similar way. Both wholesome and unwholesome groups  for  all  (6)  lines  must  be  discerned  thoroughly.  Variations  of  numbers  of  mental concomitants must be noticed, as shown in Tables of ***nāmakammaṭṭhāna***. 

**(i) 2. Due to arising of mind-group, how corporeal bases arise** 

This section concern with the relation of post-compatibility. According to the term, ***nāma*** (mind-group), wholesome, unwholesome, consequence, mere functioning consciousness and mental concomitants, which are occurring in the continuum of righteous person throughout life from the beginning of the first life-continuum, just after ***paṭisandhi***, must be inferred. According to the term, corporeal bases, (5) kinds of corporeal bases called eye-base, ear-base, nose-base, tongue-base, body-base, which arise simultaneously with preceding consciousness and those are still reaching into the static phase (***ṭhiti***), must be inferred. 

**PAGE-490** 
PAGE43

Those  corporeal  bases  arise  throughout  life  from  the  beginning  of  arising  until authority  of  action  (***kamma***)  is  finished  off.  Those  corporeal  bases,  which  arise simultaneously with preceding mind-moment and those are still reaching into the static phase (***ṭhiti***), are benefited by consciousness and  mental concomitants within succeeding  mind- moment through efficiency of relation of post-compatibility. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must  be  kept  in  mind  by  seeing  those  phenomena  with  the  help  of  penetrative  insight knowledge. 

1. Due to arising of post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **life-continuum**, corporeal bases arise. 

Post-compatible  mental  ***dhammas***  of  **life-continuum**  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(Corporeal  bases  are  pre-compatible  called  ***purejāta***  ***dhammas***  while  life-continuum mental  ***dhammas***  are  post-compatible  called  ***pacchājāta***  ***dhammas***.  Any  one  of  life- continuums must be discerned randomly.)  

2. Due to arising of post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **five-doors-adverting**, corporeal bases arise. 

Post-compatible  mental  ***dhammas***  of  **five-doors-adverting**  are  causal  ***dhammas***; corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  (5)  kinds  of  corporeal-bases,  which  arise simultaneously with life-continuum (interruption), which are still reaching into the static phase, must be inferred.) 

3. Due to arising of post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **seeing-consciousness**, corporeal bases arise. 

Post-compatible  mental  ***dhammas***  of  **seeing-consciousness**  are  causal  ***dhammas***; corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  (5)  kinds  of  corporeal-bases,  which  arise simultaneously with five-doors-adverting consciousness, which are still reaching into the static phase, must be inferred.) 

4. Due to arising of post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **receiving**, corporeal bases arise. Post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **receiving** are causal ***dhammas***; corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  (5)  kinds  of  corporeal-bases,  which  arise simultaneously with **seeing** consciousness, which are still reaching into the static phase, must be inferred.) 

5. Due to arising of post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **investigating**, corporeal bases arise. 

Post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **investigating** are causal ***dhammas***; corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  (5)  kinds  of  corporeal-bases,  which  arise simultaneously  with  **receiving**  consciousness,  which  are  still  reaching  into  the  static phase, must be inferred.) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE45

6. Due  to  arising  of  post-compatible  mental  ***dhammas***  of  **determining**,  corporeal  bases arise. 

Post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **determining** are causal ***dhammas***; corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  (5)  kinds  of  corporeal-bases,  which  arise simultaneously with **investigating** consciousness, which are still reaching into the static phase, must be inferred.) 

7. Due to arising of post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **the first impulsion**, corporeal bases arise. 

Post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **the first impulsion** are causal ***dhammas***; corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  (5)  kinds  of  corporeal-bases,  which  arise simultaneously with **determining** consciousness, which are still reaching into the static phase, must be inferred.) 

8. Due to arising of post-compatible mental ***dhammas*** of **the second impulsion**, corporeal bases arise. 

Post-compatible  mental  ***dhammas***  of  **the  second  impulsion**  are  causal  ***dhammas***; corporeal bases are resultant ***dhammas***. 

(According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  (5)  kinds  of  corporeal-bases,  which  arise simultaneously with **the first impulsion** consciousness, which are still reaching into the static phase, must be inferred.) 

**PAGE-491** 

So far as this extent, way of discerning would be understood. Those remaining mind- moments,  i.e.,  impulsions  and  registering  of  eye-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door- cognitive process  must  be  discerned by  taking  as  above  examples.  Both  wholesome  and unwholesome  groups  of  all  (6)  lines  must be  discerned  thoroughly.  Every  mind-moment consisting  in  each  row  of  Tables  of  ***nāmakammaṭṭhāna***,  **Volume  II**,  must  be  discerned meticulously. 

**(i)  3. Due to arising of matter, how mind-bases arise** 

In  the  five-groups-existence,  mental  ***dhammas***  has  got  ability  to  arise  only  when depended base corporeality is present. By seeing the phenomena of arising of each mental ***dhamma*** only when respective base-corporeality benefits them by means of efficiency of relations of base-pre-compatibility, dependence etc., the following ways of discerning must be carried out. 

1. Due  to  arising  of  eye-base-corporeality,  seeing-consciousness  mind-base  arises.  Eye- base-corporeality  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  seeing-consciousness  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  ear-base-corporeality,  hearing-consciousness  mind-base  arises.  Ear- base-corporeality  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  hearing-consciousness  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE45
