***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 551 - 600** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (*ASHIN ÑĀŅAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE-551** 

**[Notes:\_\_\_\_**  The  occurrence  of  fine-material  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  and  rebirth coming-into-existence, depending upon clinging-to-wrong views, clinging-to-rules & rites, clinging-to-self opinion and  the occurrence of immaterial ***kamma*** coming-into-existence and rebirth coming-into-existence and rebirth coming-into-existence depending upon any kind of clingings,  clinging-to-sensual  desire  etc.,  must  be  discerned  in  similar  way.  Now  the ***meditator***  reaches  into  the  stage  of  Knowledge  of  Discerning  Cause  &  Condition.  The Knowledge of Analysing Mentality & Corporeality and the Knowledge of Discerning Cause &  Condition  are  the  stage  of  full  understanding  on  objects  called  ***ñātapariññā***.  That ***ñātapariññā*** means the knowledge which is capable of well discriminating on corporeality- mentality  causes  and  results,  which  are  objects  of  ***Vipassanā***  knowledge.  If  a  ***meditator*** reached to other bank of that stage of full understanding on objects ***(ñāta pariññā)***, he has got lesser upstream-enterer stage resulting in securement from disaster of woeful coming-into- existence really. Therefore if a ***meditator*** is not interested in discerning on the occurrence of woeful ***kamma*** & rebirth coming-into-existence, due to presence of unwholesome formations ***(a-puññābhisańkara)***  in  the  continuity  of  corporeality-mentality  of  himself,  it  can  be omitted. For a ***meditator*** who has got the knowledge of other bank of full understanding on objects it is not essential to discern future aggregates relating to section of speech on cyclic ***dhammas (vaṭṭakathā)*** really. 

**PAGE-552** 

13. ***bhavapaccayā* *jāti***  

**Coming-into-existence is the condition for birth** 

***bhavoti panettha kammabhavova adhippeto, so hi jātiyā paccayo, na upapattibhavo.* (*Abhi-A-2-178, Vs-2-210*)** 

In  the  phrase,  ***bhavapaccayā  jāti***,  the  term,  ***bhava***,  should  be  meant  as  ***kamma*** coming-into-existence  ***(kammabhava)***  because  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  only  is  the source of birth ***(jāti)***, but not rebirth coming-into-existence which is not the source of birth. This is the meaning in accordance with olden commentaries. Sub-commentators, however, assumed by means of another method as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Mūlaṭī-2-124, Mahāṭī-2-334)*** 

Because the beginning of rebirth coming-into-existence called consequence corporeal and  mentral  aggregates  of  newly  acquired  life  is  called  ***jāti***  (birth),  rebirth  coming-into- existence is not causal ***dhamma*** of ***jāti***. Therefore commentator said the term, ***bhava***, should not be meant as rebirth coming-into-existence with relating to the phrase, ***bhavapaccayā jāti***. 

However, significant state of affairs ***(vikāra)*** which is worth saying as “the beginning of aggregates of newly acquired life” is called ***jāti*** with the result that unless nebirth coming- into-existence is present, ***jāti*** is absent. Then ***jāti*** is benefited by not only ***kamma*** coming- into-existence but also rebirth coming-into-existence. It is appropriate saying on the meaning of ***bhava***. It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ 

The commentator explained that the proximate cause of ***jāti*** of corporeality is present occurring corporealities in ***Abhi-A-1-364*** in which explained that “the growth ***(upacaya)*** has the proximate cause, beginning corporeality while the continuity ***(santati)*** has the proximate cause, corporealities which are occurring continuously”. Therefore causal ***dhammas*** of ***jāti*** are not only ***kamma*** coming-into-existence but also rebirth coming-into-existence. **(*Mūlaṭī-2- 124, Mahāṭī-2-334*)** 

1. **Conditional Relations \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_** That coming-into-existence ***(bhava)*** benefits birth ***(jāti)*** [***=kammabhava*** benefits ***upapattibhava]*** by means of efficiency of two kinds of relations, to wit,  asynchronous  action  ***(nānākkhaņika  kamma)***  are  determinative  dependence ***(upanissaya)***. **(*Abhi-A-2-178, Vs-2-210*)** 
1. **Questions and Answers \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_** 

In this case \_\_\_\_ how it can be understood on the fact ***kamma*** coming-into-existence is casual ***dhamma*** of ***jāti*** and the answer is as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

Even  though  extrinsic  factors  are  the  same  in  occurrence  of  beings,  significant variations, such as occurrence of inferiority, occurrence of superiority etc., can be seen with the result that the principle of nature of things called ***kammabhava*** is the real source of ***jāti***, can be understood. 

**Page-553** 

**Further explanations \_\_\_\_** Although these extrinsic factors, viz., 

1. sperm of the father 
1. ovum of the mother 
1. nutriment etc., which are capable of benefiting by means of efficiency of relation of determinative  dependence  etc.,  are  the  same  in  occurrence  of  beings,  for  instance,  even between identical twins, these kinds of significant variations, viz.,  
1. inferiority  called  the  occurrence  which  is  worth  designating  as  inferior  status  of acquired aggregates, 
1. superiority  called  the  occurrence  which  is  worth  designating  as  superior  status  of acquired aggregates, 
1. beauty, 
1. ugliness, 
1. long longevity, 
1. short longevity, 
1. wealthiness, 
1. poorness, 
1. presence of numerous attendants 
1. presence of few attendants 
1. unhealthiness 
1. healthiness, etc., 

can be seen in daily life. These kinds of variation never lacks factors really. It is because \_\_\_ those kinds of significant variation are absent both all the time and continuum of all beings. Furthermore  those  factors  are  not  other  ones,  except  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence.  It  is because \_\_\_\_ there are no other causal ***dhammas***, except ***kamma*** coming-into-existence in the  continuum  of  beings  which  are  arisen  by  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence.  Therefore significant variations, inferiority, superiority etc., have a factor called ***kamma*** coming-into- existence only. It is right. \_\_\_\_***Kamma*** coming-into-existence is real factor of significant variations, inferiority, superiority etc., of beings. 

The Buddha preached that ***"kammam satte vibhajati yadidam hīnappaņītatāya;"*** **(*M- 3-244*)** = The action ***(kamma)*** differentiates beings through the occurrence of inferiority and superiority; **(*M-3-244*)** in ***Cūļakamma vibhanga Sutta***. Therefore the principle of nature that ***kamma*** coming-into-existence is the source of ***jāti***, is worth understanding. 

**Page-554** 

14. ***jātipaccayā jarāmaraņam*** 

**Birth is the condition for ageing & death** 

Again if the nature of birth is absent, the nature of ageing & death can be absent. Nature  of  sorrow,  lamentation,  pain,  grief  and  despair  can  also  be  absent  consequently. Actually \_\_\_\_ only when the nature of birth is present apparently both the nature of ageing & death and nature of sorrow lamentation etc., which are relating to ageing & death in the continuum  of  foolish  being;  or  nature  of  sorrow,  lamentation  etc.,  which  are  relating  to ageing & death in the continuum of foolish being who comes in contact with pain, destruction of relatives ***(ñātibyasana)*** etc., usually arise. This nature of birth, therefore, is the source of not only ageing & death but also sorrow, lamentation etc. It should be understood in this way. 

That birth benefits ageing & death, sorrow, lamentation etc., by efficiency of relation of determinative dependence only in the aspect of indirect way of preaching methcdology of ***Suttanta***, called ***upanissaya koti***. ***(***Due to absence of direct way of preaching in ***Paṭṭhāna***, ***Abhi  dhamma***,  it  is  designated  as  ***upanissayakoti***  through  indirect  way  of  preaching methodology of ***Suttanta.) (Abhi-A-2-179, Vs-2-210, 211)*** 

1. **Why ageing & death are designated as one factor only? *Pāli Quotation (Anuṭī-2-97)*** 

With  relating  to  showing  factors  of  dependent-origination  there  is  a  reasonable question that why ageing & death are designated as one factor only. The answer is that \_\_\_ both kinds of ageing & death are the same nature of arising through birth. During occurring in  that  way  there  is  none  who  passes  away  without  ageing.  There  is  no  ageing  without passing away. After reaching into the static phase ***(ṭhitikhaņa)*** it has got ageing and it will perish away certainly at the perishing phase ***(bhangakkhaņa)***. In those two kinds of nature, death  is  not  caused  by  ageing  but  by  birth  really.  Those  two  kinds  of  ageing  &  death, therefore, are preached commonly as only one factor. It is not preached as only one factor neither due to simultaneous occurrence of both kinds of mentality-corporeality, as factor of mind-corporeality ***(namarūpam)***, nor due to presence of the same function of bases, as factor of six bases ***(salayatana)*. (*Anuṭī-2-97*)** 

2. **Way of keeping in mind casual & resultant dhammas** 

By seeing any kind of ***kamma*** coming-into-existence cultivated for future coming- into-existence and occurrence of birth the ***meditator*** has to keep in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas***. If a ***meditator*** prays for attainment of life of ***deva*** preacher in future, the birth of ***deva*** preacher resulting from the most favorable sensual wholesome ***kamma*** coming-into- existence must be kept in mind. 

**Page-555** 

If such ***meditator*** prays for attainment of life of ***brahma***, the birth of ***brahma***'s coming-into- existence resulting from fine-material wholesome absorption must be kept in mind. If such ***meditator*** prays for attainment of life of ***bhikkhu***, the birth of ***bhikkhu*** **[**=five aggregates of process  of  newly  occurrence  of  next  existence  ***(paṭisadhi)*]**,  resulting  from  the  most favourable sensual wholesome deed (=any kind of ***kamma*** coming-into-existence) must be kept in mind. 

\1.  Due to arising of ***kamma*** coming-into-existence, the birth arises. 

***Kamma*** coming-into-existence is causal ***dhamma***, the birth is resultant ***dhamma***. 

***jāti  (birth)***  \_\_\_\_  At  the  birth  moment  of  ***deva***  preacher  both  (79)  kinds  of  corporeal ***dhammas,*** viz., eye-decad, ear-decad, nose-decad, tongue-decad, body-decad, heart-decad, sex-decad, vital nonad which are produced by ***kamma*** and (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas***, if ***paṭisandhi*** is joyful with three roots ***(tihetuka somanassa)***, arise as the beginning moment. 

***Brahmabhava*** \_\_\_\_ If the birth is fine-material coming-into-existence, corporeal ***dhammas*** include eye-decad, ear-decad, heart-decad, vital nonad, while mental ***dhammas*** include (34) kinds  for  first  absorption  consequence  ***paṭisandhi***;  (32)  kinds  for  second  absorption consequence ***paṭisandhi*** (31) kinds with agreeable feeling for third absorption consequence ***paṭisandhi***; (31) kinds with neutrality feeling for fourth absorption consequence ***paṭisandhi*** respectively. 

***Bhikkhu bhava*** \_\_\_\_ If the birth is ***bhikkhu***'s coming-into-existence. Corporeal ***dhammas*** are of (30) kinds while mental ***dhammas***, (34) kinds for ***patsandhi*** joyful with three roots. 

By seeing relationship between each ***kamma*** coming-into-existence and respective birth causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as \_\_\_ “due to arising of ***kamma*** coming-into-existence, the birth arises; ***kamma*** coming-into-existence is causal ***dhamma***, the birth is resultant ***dhamma***”. 

**3.  Unwholesome  *kamma*  coming-into-existence  and  immaterial  coming-into- existence** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-242)*** 

The practicing ***bhikkhu***, who exists by distinguishing and keeping in mind well on conditioned things which are objects of ***Vipassanā*** knowledge, who has fulfilled with full understanding on objects ***(ñātapariññā)***, has got foothold in the noble admonishment of the Buddha. It can be said he has taken root resulting in designating as lesser Upstream-entere ***(cūļasotāpaññā)*** with fixed joyful destination of coming-into-existence. **(*Abhi-A-2-242*)** 

**Page-556** 

Therefore  the  practicing  ***meditator***  who  has  reached  into  the  stage  of  full understanding on objects is not worth occurring as the birth of woeful coming-into-existence through unwholesome ***kamma*** coming-into-existence. Then there is not essential to discern causal relationship between unwholesome ***kamma*** coming-into-existence and birth of woeful coming-into-existence  really.  Due  to  presence  of  unwholesome  ***kamma***  coming-into- existence, the birth of woeful coming-into-existence etc., is possible to arise for persons who have  not  got  the  insight  upto  the  Knowledge  of  Discerning  Cause  and  Condition  yet. (However, great gentlemen with great wish like ***bodhisalta*** (=the person who will become the Buddha in future) etc., are exceptional case.) 

Similarly it may be a very few probability to arise the birth of immaterial coming- into-existence  resulting  from  immaterial  wholesome  absorption  ***kamma***-  coming-into- existence for a ***meditator*** who has got the stage of full understanding on objects. It is because if common worlding person reaches into the immaterial sphere the opportunity to become ariyahood has been lost inthat immaterial sphere as ***Udaka*** hermit and ***Devīļa*** hermit who were designated as great looser under admonishment of the Buddha. However, after attaining ariyahood in this life, ifhe has to continue the journey of rounds of rebirth and then the wishes to  attain  immaterial  coming-into-existence,  he  could  get  both  immaterial  coming-into- existence and the upper Noble Path-and Fruit Knowledge consequently. If a such ***meditator*** has opportunity to reach immaterial coming-into-existence, causal relationship between any kind  of  immaterial  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  and  birth  of  immaterial  coming-into- existence has to discern as he likes. The basic meaning of birth of immaterial sphere is four mental aggregates only. 

Furthermore, by seeing the occurrence of ageing & death resulting from birth in future new coming-into-existence causal relationship has to be kept in mind. During keeping in mind there are two ways of discerning, to wit, in the aspect of conventional reality & in the aspect of ultimate reality because birth, ageing & death are explained through both aspects. If way  of  discerning  in  the  aspect  of  conventional  reality  is  intended  to  perform,  causal relationship could be kept in mind by seeing occurrence of ageing & death depending on birth as follows.\_\_\_\_ 

2. Due to arising of birth, ageing & death arise. 

`     `Birth is causal ***dhamma***; Ageing & death are resultant ***dhamma***. 

If a such process of ***paṭisandhi*** is present apparently in one coming-into-existence, one  process  of  death  is  natural  fixed  law  indeed.  It  is  called  death  in  the  aspect  of conventional reality ***(sammutimaraņa)***. Interval between those birth & death is ageing. By seeing occurrence of ageing & death, due to presence of that birth, causal relationship must be kept in mind. Those are future coming birth and future coming ageing & death indeed. 

**Page-557** 

If  the  way  of  discerning  in  the  aspect  of  ultimate  reality  is  intended  to  perform, phenomena  of  both  simultaneous  arising  ***(=jāti)***,  static  phase  ***(jarā)***  and  perishing  away ***(maraņa)*** of corporeal ***dhammas*** within one corporeal unit should be discerned. By seeing phenomena of arising, static phase, perishing away of either all corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring whether (6) doors, bodily parts or throughout body as a whole or mental ***dhammas*** within the same  mind  moment,  which  are  occurring  in  (6)  doors  by  taking  objects  of  (6)  kinds accordingly, causal relationship between birth and ageing & death must be kept in mind as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

3. Due to arising of birth, ageing & death arise. 

`    `Birth is causal ***dhamma***; Ageing & death are resultant ***dhammas***. 

The phenomenon of arising ***(uppāda)*** of corporeality-mentality is called ***jāti***, while static phase ***(ṭhiti)***, ***jarā***; perishing phase ***(bhanga)***, ***maraņa*** in the aspect of ultimate sense. 

**[  Notes:\_\_\_\_\_**   Remaining  kinds  of  consciousness  called  ***vīthimutta  citta***  (consciousness other than cognitive process), viz., ***paṭisandhi***, life-continuum, death consciousness, are also discerned and kept in mind similarly. It should be understood especially these corporeality- mentality are corporeality-mentality of future coming-into-existence only.**]** 

4. **Sorrow,  Lamentation,  pain,  grief  and  despair  (*soka  parideva  dukkha  domanassa upāyāsa*)** 

These, sorrow, lamentation etc., are consequence which are not directly resulted from birth. In the continuum of the Buddha and Arahants who are free from defilements, there is no  opportunity  to  arise  sorrow  etc.,  even  though  they  have  birth  for  final  coming-into- existence. Therefore, it can be said\_\_\_ “sorrow etc., are consequence which are not directly resulted  from birth”.  Depending  upon birth  those  sorrow  etc.,  can  arise  in  continuum  of worldings. In the continuum of being who faces with dangers, distruction of relatives etc., if wise attention can not be occurred by bearing in mind the nature of corporeality, the nature of mentality, the nature of causality, the nature of result, the nature of impermanence, the nature of suffering, the nature of non-self but unwise attention occurs by taking into heart as man, woman, person, being, human being, heavenly being, ***brahma***, living being, self-being, etc., or son, daughter, grand son, grand daughter, grand grand son, wife, husband, uncle, aunt, grand father, grand mother etc., or gold, silver, diamond, jewel etc., those sorrow etc., can be occurred. However, facing with various kinds of destructions, destruction of relatives etc., can occur in the continuum of being with birth only resulting in the designating as source of sorrow etc., is birth really. Thus by seeing occurrence of sorrow etc., depending upon birth causal relationship must be kept in mind as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

3. Due  to  arising  of  birth,  sorrow  arises.  Birth  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  sorrow***  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Due to arising of birth, lamentation ***… R …***despair arises. 

`    `Birth is causal ***dhamma***; lamentation ***… R ...*** despair is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Page-558** 

5. **Way of cycle of coming-into-existence** 

Way of cycle of coming-into-existence throughout rounds of rebirth was preached by a  way,  "due  to  presence  of  ignorance,  formations  arise"  etc,  in  which  the  ignorance  is beginning while sorrow etc., are end. As mentioned in beginning section of this first method of dependent origination, however, when sorrow etc., occur the ignorance also concerns with those factors really. In accordance with the preaching that "***ā savasamudayā avijjāsamudayo*** 

- due to arising of taints, ignorance arises", the ignorance also occurs depending upon taints. If ignorance arises, formation will arise again consequently, and so forth. Thus it should be understood (12) factors of dependent origination are cycling perpetually throughout rounds of rebirth until the path-knowledge of Arahant is attained. 
6. __Voidness from *kāraka vedaka*__* 

Because this way of cycle of coming-into-existence throughout rounds of rebirth as shown  in  dependent-origination  is  only  the  principle  of  process  of  resultant  ***dhammas***, formation etc., depending upon causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc., it should be understood the principle of dependent origination is void from both ***kāraka atta*** (= creator self), by which a consideration that ….. ***"brahma mahābrahmā seṭṭho sajitā",*** 

**(*Di-1-17*)** 

- "He is ***brahma***, great ***brahma***, the most superiror and can create". **(*Di-1-17*)** and 

***Vedaka atta (jīva atta)*** (= living self), which can feel agreeable and disagreeable feeling, by which a consideration that…. 

"Self-identity of mine can speak benefit and non-benefit; it can feel aggreable feeling etc., it can realize all kinds of objects, it is worth realizing by both itself and others", (it means ***jīva atta***). **(*Abhi-A-2-181*)** 

7. **Voidness from *dhuva-subha-sukha-atta*** 

Furthermore,  because  in  this  way  of  cycle  of  coming-into-existence  throughout rounds of rebirth the ignorance has the nature of arising and perishing away it is void from nature of durability. It is also void from the nature of pleasantness ***(subha)***, due to occurrence of both being oppressed by defilements, taints etc., and deserving to attain defilements, lust, anger, conceit etc., which are capable of oppressing and worrying. It is also void from the nature of happiness ***(sukha)***, due to occurrence of being oppressed by phenomena of arising and perishing away. 

**Page-559** 

It is also void from self-identity ***(atta)*** which is capable of indulging one's wish, due to occurrence  of  relating  to  causal  ***dhammas***,  taints  etc.,  All  kinds  of  remaining  factors  of dependent origination, formations etc., are also void from the nature of durability ***(dhuva)*** the nature of pleasantness ***(subha)***, the nature of happiness ***(sukha)***, self-identity ***(atta)***. 

In other words, \_\_\_\_ the ignorance is…. 

1. neither self-identity ***(atta)*** 
1. nor property of self-identity; 
1. It is neither on self-identity 
1. nor possessing of self-identity. 

Remaining factor, formations etc., are also in similar way. Therefore it should be understood  this  way  of  cycling  of  coming-into-existence  throughout  rounds  of  rebirth  as shown  in  dependent-origination,  in  the  next  method,  these  (12)  factors  of  dependent- origination are void from nature of durability-pleasantness-happiness-self-identity ***(dhuva- subha-sukha-atta)***. **(*Abhi-A-2-181, Vs-2-213*)** 

Furthermore, in this cycle of coming-into-existence of rounds of rebirth as shown in dependent-origination includes …. 

1. (2) kinds of roots ***(mūla)*** 
1. (3) kinds of periodicity ***(kāla)*** 
1. (12) kinds of factors 
1. (3) kinds of junctions 
1. (4) kinds of layers 
1. (20) kinds of process respectively. 
8. **Two kinds of roots (*mūla*)** 

In that cycle of coming-into-existence of rounds of rebirth there are two kinds of roots called  ignorance  ***(avijjā)***  and  craving  ***(taņhā)***.  In  those  kinds,  the  root  ***dhamma***  called ignorance is designated as significant root ***dhamma***, due to ability to perform present result called  ***vipāka***  which  is  started  from  previous  allotment  called  ignorance,  formations  and ended in feeling called consciousness-mind-matter-six bases-contact-feeling. 

After the feeling, the craving is found as "***vedanā paccayā taņhā =*** feeling is the condition for craving". In two kinds of allotments found in cycle of coming-into-existence if rounds of rebirth as shown in dependent-origination, i.e., previous allotment and posterior allotment,  the  ignorance  is  beginning  of  previous  allotment  while  the  craving  is  that  of posterior  allotment.  Due  to  extending  on  future  allotment  by  linking  between  causal ***dhammas***  called  clinging,  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  called consciousness-mind & matter-six bases-contact-feeling, which can be said rebirth coming- into-existence or birth ***(jāti)***, that craving is designated as significant root which is capable of extending future allotment. 

In  those  previous  cycle  and  posterior  cycle,  the  former  is  preached  by  means  of persons with streak of wrong views while the latter is preached by means of persons with streak of craving ***(taņhā carita)***. **(*Abhi-A-2-181, Vs-2-213*)** 

**Page-560** 

It is right. \_\_\_\_ The ignorance ***(avijjā)*** is capable of concealing on the real nature of ultimate ***dhammas*** not to be known as they really are. That concealing ignorance performs not to deliver from rounds of rebirth for those persons with streak of wrong views by making wrong  belief  called  unwise  attention  on  objects.  Therefore  the  ignorance  can  persuade persons  with  streak  of  wrong  views  in  the  rounds  of  rebirth.  In  other  words  \_\_\_\_\_  the ignorance  of persons  with  streak  of  wrong  views  is capable  of bringing  forth  rounds  of rebirth. 

Due  to  concealing  on  real  nature  of  contact  ***(phassa)***  by  ignorance,  the  latter  is capable of persuading persons with streak of wrong views in rounds of rebirth by making wrong way of taking into heart as "the self-identity contacts with object" etc. 

In other words, in the continuum of persons with streak of wrong views rounds of rebirth called occurrence of formations etc., can be brought forth. **(*Mūlaṭī-2-126*)** 

In  this  case,  the  ***dhamma***  which  is  capable  of  taking  into  heart  wrongly  as  self- identity  feels  contacts  with  object;  self-identity  feels  sensation,  instead  of  real  nature  of mental impression of contact ***(phassa)*** and real nature of sensation of feeling ***(vedana)*** is not the ignorance but wrong view ***(diṭṭhi)*** indeed.  Because that wrong view is resulted from ignorance it is methaphorical usage called ***phalupacara***, ***taddhammūpacāra*** by which the name of result is applied on the name of cause. **(*Anuṭī-2-136*)** 

In the next method \_\_\_\_ being means self-identity indeed. The opinion that "when it is dead that self-identity annihilates", is called annihilation view ***(uccheda diṭṭhi)***. In order to remove totally that annihilation view the first cycle of coming-into-existence until "ignorance is the condition for formations ***… R …*** the contact is the condition for feeling", is preached. The  arising  of  resultant  ***dhammas***,  formations  etc.,  shows  ceaseless  arising  of  causal ***dhammas***,  ignorance  etc.  It  can  be  said  if  causal  ***dhammas***  only  is  terminated  without resultant  ***dhamma**,*  cycle  of  coming-into-existence  of  round  of  rebirth  is  discontinuous. However, cealess arising in that way is shown by arising of resultant ***dhamma***. It can be understood the fact that the first cycle of coming-into-existence is worth preaching in order to remove totally annihilation view because arising resultant ***dhammas***, formations etc., shows clearly ceaseless arising of causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc. **(*Abhi-A-2-181, Vs-2-213*)** 

**PAGE-561** 

The second cycle of coming-into-existence of rounds of rebirth, i.e., from craving to ageing & death, is preached in order to remove the opinion called eternity view ***(sassata diṭṭhi)*** that belief as "self-identity is permanent". It is because \_\_\_\_ it can be understood the fact that due to presence of terminating ***dhamma*** called ageing & death of every causal & resultant ***dhamma*** for one life, the second cycle of coming-into-existence shows clearly on absence of eternity. **(*Abhi-A-2-181, Vs-2-213*)** 

In the first cycle of coming-into-existence, the phrase, "***viññāņapaccayā nāmarūpam*** 

- consciousness is the condition for mind-matter," shows the occurrence of corporeality and mentality of embryo at the moment of conception when bases, eye-bases etc., are incomplete. Afterwards,  the  occurrence  of  bases,  eye-base  etc,  is  shown  by  the  phrase,  "***nāmarūpa paccayā saļāyatanam =*** mind-matter are the condition for bases.” Therefore, previous portion of cycle of coming-into-existence is preached with referring to beings with process of birth inside the womb ***(gabbha seyyaka)*** because it shows sequence of occurrence of bases which conforms to that of occurrence of bases of beings with process of birth inside the womb. 

In the posterior cycle of coming-into-existence, when the phrase ***"bhavapaccayā jāti*** 

- coming-into-existence is the condition for birth" is preached six bases, eye-base etc., also include  in  accordance  with  the  word,  ***upapattibhava,  jāti.***  Bases,  eye-base  etc.,  arise simultaneously  at  process  of  ***paṭisandhi***  in  spontaneous  occurring  beings  ***(opapātika).*** Therefore it can be understood the second cycle of coming-into-existence is preached with referring to spontaneous occurring beings. **(*Abhi-A-2-181, Vs-2-213*)** 

**9. Three kinds of periodicity** 

There are three kinds of periodicity, i.e., past, present and future. 

1. Ignorance-formations are past ***dhammas,*** 
1. Those ***dhammas*** from consciousness to coming-into-existence are present ***dhammas,*** 
1. Birth-ageing & death are future ***dhammas.* (Abhi-A-2-181, Vs-2-213)** 
10. **Twelve kinds of factors** 

There  are  twelve  kinds  of  factors  of  dependent  origination,  to  wit,  ignorance, formations, consciousness, mind-matter, bases, contact, feeling, craving, clinging, coming- into-existence, birth, ageing & death. 

11. **Three kinds of junctions** 
1. One junction between formations and consciousness of ***paṭisandhi,*** where past causes and present results join. (Formations are past causes while consciousness of ***paṭisandhi*** is present result indeed.) 
1. One  junction  between  feeling  and  craving,  where  present  resultant  ***dhammas***  and present causal ***dhammas*** join. (Feeling is resultant ***dhamma*** produced by past causes while craving is causal ***dhamma*** which is cultivated for future consequence round.) 
1. One  junction  between  coming-into-existence  and  birth,  where  present  causal ***dhammas***  and  future  resultant  ***dhammas***  join.  (Coming-into-existence  is  present  causal ***dhamma*** while birth is future resultant ***dhamma.***) Thus there are three kinds of junctions in factors of dependent origination. 

**12. Four kinds of layers** 

1. Past causes, one layer, include past five factors of causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action. 
1. Present results, one layer, include present five factors of resultatnt ***dhammas*** called consciousness, mind-matter, bases, contact, feeling. 

**Page-562** 

3. Present  causes,  one  layer,  include  present  five  factors  of  causal  ***dhammas***  called ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action. 
3. Future  results,  one  layer,  include  future  five  factors  of  resultant  ***dhammas***  called consciousness, mind-matter, bases, contact, feeling, which are designeated as birth ***(jāti)***. Thus there are four layers in principle of dependant origination. 

**13. Twenty kinds of processes** 

***atīte hetavo pañca, idāni phalapañcakam. idāni hetavo pañca, āyatim phalapañcakam.* (*Abhi-A-2-182, Vs-2-214*)** 

1. Five kinds of past causal ***dhammas,*** 
1. Five kinds of present resultant ***dhammas,*** 
1. Five kinds of present causal ***dhammas,*** 
1. Five kinds of future resultant ***dhammas,*** 

Thus there are (20) kinds if processes in principle of dependent origination. 

The practicing ***meditator*** has to discern ceaseless cycles of those natural ***dhammas*** called two roots, three periods, twelve factors, three junctions, four layers, twenty processes by insight knowledge. 
PAGE11
**Page-564** 

**Table 1. Showing way of cycle of coming-into-existence with present coming-into-existence as centre** 



|**3 Junctions** |**12 Factors** |**20 process** |**4 Layers** |**3 Peridicity** |
| - | - | - | - | - |
|<p>1 Junction » </p><p>1 Junction » </p><p>1 Junction » </p>|1.Ignorance  = 2.Formations  = |Ignorance + Craving + Clinging Formations = Actions ***(kamma)*** |<p>Past causes </p><p>(1) layer </p>|Past Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
||3.Consciousness= 4.Mind-Matter  = 5.Bases  = 6.Contact   = 7.Feeling  = |1.Consciousness 2.Mind-Matter 3.Bases 4.Contact 5.Feeling |<p>Present Results </p><p>(1) layer </p>|Present Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
||8.Craving  = 9.Clinging 10.Coming-into- existence  = |<p>Ignorance + Craving + Clinging </p><p>***Kamma*** coming-into-existence </p><p>- Formations + Action </p>|<p>Present Causes </p><p>(1) layer </p>||
||11. Birth 12.Ageing-Death |<p>Rebirth coming-into-existence </p><p>- Consciousness + Mind-Matter + Bases + Contact + Feeling </p>|<p>Future Results </p><p>(1) layer </p>|Future Life Periodic ***dhammas*** |
**Table 2. Showing way of cycle of coming-into-existence with first past coming-into-existence as centre** 



|**3 Junctions** |**12 Factors** |**20 process** |4. **Layers** |3. **Periodicity** |
| - | - | - | - | - |
|<p>` `Junction » </p><p>1 Junction » 1 Junction » </p>|1.Ignorance  = 2.Formations  = |Ignorance + Craving + Clinging Formations = Actions ***(kamma)*** |Second Past Life Causes (1) layer |Second Past Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
||3.Consciousness= 4.Mind-Matter  = 5.Bases  = 6.Contact   = 7.Feeling  = |1.Consciousness 2.Mind-Matter 3.Bases 4.Contact 5.Feeling |First Past Life Results (1) layer |First Past Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
||8.Craving  = 9.Clinging 10.Coming-into- existence  = |<p>Ignorance + Craving + Clinging </p><p>***Kamma*** coming-into-existence </p><p>- Formations + Action </p>|<p>First Past Life Causes </p><p>(1) layer </p>||
||<p>11. Birth </p><p>12.Ageing-Death </p>|<p>Rebirth coming-into-existence </p><p>- Consciousness + Mind-Matter + Bases + Contact + Feeling </p>|<p>Present Life Results </p><p>(1) layer </p>|Present Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
It should be understood relationship of successive previous coming-into-existence similarly. Links of three successive coming-into- existence should be discerned continuously. 

**Page-565** 

**Table 3.  Showing way of cycle coming-into-existence with first future coming-into-existence as centre** 



|**3 Junctions** |**12 Factors** |**20 process** |4. **Layers** |3. **Periodicity** |
| - | - | - | - | - |
|<p>1 Junction » </p><p>1 Junction » 1 Junction » </p>|1.Ignorance  = 2.Formations  = |Ignorance + Craving + Clinging Formations = Actions ***(kamma)*** |<p>Present Life Causes </p><p>(1) layer </p>|Present Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
||3.Consciousness= 4.Mind-Matter  = 5.Bases  = 6.Contact   = 7.Feeling  = |1.Consciousness 2.Mind-Matter 3.Bases 4.Contact 5.Feeling |First Future Life Results (1) layer |First Future Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
||8.Craving  = 9.Clinging 10.Coming-into- existence  = |<p>Ignorance + Craving + Clinging </p><p>***Kamma*** coming-into-existence </p><p>- Formations + Action </p>|First Future Life Causes (1) layer ||
||11. Birth 12.Ageing-Death |<p>Rebirth coming-into-existence </p><p>- Consciousness + Mind-Matter + Bases + Contact + Feeling </p>|Second Future Life Results (1) layer |Second Future Life Periodic ***Dhammas*** |
It should be understood relationship of successive future coming-into-existence similarly. Links of three successive coming-into-existence, until end of future aggregates, should be discerned continuously. 
PAGE14

**Page-566 14. Way of cycle of three rounds *(Vaṭṭa)*** 

Formation  and  coming-into-existence  (=***kammabhava***)  belong  to  action  round (***kammavaṭṭa***) while ignorance, craving, clinging belong to defilement round ***(kilesa vaṭṭa);*** consciousness,  mind-matter,  bases,  contact,  feeling  belong  to  consequence  round  ***(vipāka vaṭṭa)***. Thus, it should be understood this cycle of coming-into-existence of rounds of rebirth as shown in dependent origination with three kinds of rounds ***(vaṭṭa)*** always cycle throughout period with ceaseless defilement round as Ferris wheel, due to presence of causal ***dhammas*** perpetually. **(*Vs-2-216*)** 

Among five kinds of past life causes, three causes, ignorance, craving and clinging, belong to defilement round while formation and ***kamma*** coming-into-existence belong to action round. Depending upon those defilements and action, five kinds of resultant ***dhammas***, from consciousness of ***paṭisandhi*** to feeling, arise in this life and then due to occurrence of cycle of defilement and action which joins with consequence ***(vipāka)***, those are designated as round ***(vaṭṭa)***. The term, ***vaṭṭa***, means repeated rotating over and over again. Furthermore, due to occurrence of rotating by joining with defilement called ignorance, craving, clinging and action  called formation, ***kamma*** coming-into-existence, which  are present life causal ***dhammas***,  five  kinds  of  present  life  resultant  ***dhammas***,  consciousness  etc.,  are  also designated as round ***(vaṭṭa)***. 

In that cycle of coming-into-existence of rounds of rebirth, structural constituents of action  ***(kamma  sambhāra)***,  which  can  proliferate  resultant  ***dhammas***,  which  had  been cultivated  in  previous  coming-into-existence,  are  of  (5)  kinds  (i.e.  ignorance,  craving, clinging formation, action while resultant ***dhammas*** called ***vipāka dhamma*** in this coming- into-existence are of five kinds, (i.e., consciousness, mind-matter, bases, contact, feeling,). 

Structural constituents of action, which can proliferate resultant ***dhammas***, which has been  cultivated  in  present  coming-into-existence,  are  of  five  kinds;  Resultant  ***dhammas*** called ***vipāka dhamma*** in future coming-into-existence are of five kinds. 

Thus (10) kinds of ***dhammas*** are action ***(kamma)*** and (10) kinds of ***dhammas*** are consequence ***(vipāka)***. Thus the action, which is worth cultivating in two periods, past and present, is called ***kamma*** while the consequence of two periods, present and future, is called ***vipāka***. In this way this cycle of coming-into-existence of rounds of rebirth as shown in dependent  origination,  called  ***paccayākāra  vaṭṭa***  (round  of  cause  and  condition)  includes action ***(kamma)*** and consequence of action ***(kamma vipāka)*** only. _(**Abhi-A-2-184**_**)** 

**Ten  kinds  of  action  (*kamma*)  \_\_\_\_**  Ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  and  formation  which belong to causal ***dhammas*** are association with action and then they can be said as action due to presence of the same nature with action and very beneficial on action. **(*Mūlaṭī-2-127*)** Those five kinds belong to five kinds of past causal ***dhammas*** and five kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** resulting in (10) kinds totally. In the aspect of consequence ***dhammas***, those are also (10) kinds totally, resulting from five kinds of present results and five kinds of future results. 

Furthermore, the action is ***kamma sankhepa*** (action abstract) in two periods of past and present indeed. It is the action summarized from causal ***dhammas***, ignorance, craving etc. The consequence ***(vipāka)*** is ***vipāka sankhepa*** (consequence abstract) in two periods called present and future. It is the consequence summarized from consciousness etc. Thus all factors of this cycle of coming-into-existence round of rebirth occur as both action abstract and consequence abstract. 

