***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 101 - 150** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN ÑĀ*ŅAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE-101** 

During discerning on origination and cessation of world of conditioned things in that way,  commentary  and  sub-commentary  of  Connected  Discourses  (***samyutta  nikāya***) illustrates how practicing ***meditator*** can see those phenomena as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

As the well sighted man sees visible-objects by seeing-consciousness, similarly \_\_\_\_\_ the practicing ***meditator*** sees both ***dhammas*** called five kinds of clinging aggregates, origin of  those  clinging  aggregates  called  ***samudaya  dhamma***  and  cessation  of  those  clinging aggregates called ***nirodha dhamma*** which are uncovered by the light of wisdom produced by the knowledge discerning on origination of world of conditioned things or cessation of world of conditioned things by experiential knowledge of himself. (***Sam-A-2-49, Sam-ţī-2-63***) 

Because of any kind of some reasons, mind-door adverting consciousness takes the object of concept or ***Vipassanā*** knowledge, the knowledge of Discriminating on conditioned things (***sańkhāra pariccheda ñāņa***), the knowledge of cause and condition etc., which are keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas***, become weak, moderate large masses of corporeal units can usually be seen. Sometimes, images of performance of wholesome deeds or  unwholesome  deeds  during  young  age  can  usually  be  appeared  due  to  efficiency  of attention (***manasikāra***) called mind-door adverting consciousness belonging to mind-door cognitive process. 

Those  images  of  concept  are  also  called  ***sańkhāra  nimitta***  (=  phenomena  of conditioned things) only. 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-284)*** 

***(Mahāţī-2-447)*** 

In the commentary called ***Visuddhi Magga***, it is explained that the term, ***nimitta***, means ***sańkhāra nimitta*** (= phenomena of conditioned things) and that designation called ***nimitta*** is the name of conditioned things occurring in three periods, past, future, present, in ***Vs-2-284***. 

With relating to explanation in this way, in accordance with grammatical rules sub commentator Sayadaws illustrates again as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-102** 

The person who has not experienced ***vipassanā*** practice until the field of ultimate nature and the person who puts aside ***vipassanā*** practice either temporary or moderate long although he has experienced true ***vipassanā*** practice usually sees bulk of shape and form of conditioned things called ***saviggaha***. Compactness of continuity, compactness of form and compactness of function of corporeal ***dhammas*** and compactness of continuity, compactness of form, compactness of function and compactness of object of mental ***dhammas*** are still present and those can be seen sometimes. 

These four kinds of compactness of corporeality and mentality can be seen as masses of corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** for ***meditators*** who are still trying to attain the knowledge of Analyzing Mentality-Corporeality and the Knowledge of Discerning Cause & Condition or for ***meditators*** who put aside ***vipassanā*** practice. If conditioned things are absent, there is no mass of corporeality-mentality because there is no mass free from conditioned things. 

Conditioned things are explained as ***sańkhāra nimitta*** through metaphorical usage by which the name of compactness of continuity, compactness of form, compactness of function, compactness of object, i.e., ***sańkhāranimitta***, are applied as the name of conditioned things which are ultimate reality after breaking down all kinds of compactness really. 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

***(Mahāţī-2-447)*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-277) (Mahāţī-2-439) (Mūlaţī-1-113) (Anuţī-1-121)*** 

When  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  arises  with  sharp  and  powerful  efficiency  and conditioned  things  appears  in  the  insight  of  ***meditator***  quickly  by  means  of  arising  and passing away\_\_\_\_\_ ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge does not reach to any kind of 

**PAGE-103** 

1. ***uppāda =*** significance phenomenon called arising, 
1. ***ţhiti      =*** the state of ageing called static phase, 
1. ***pavatta  =***  arising  of  all  kinds  of  coming-into-existence,  sensual  sphere,  fine  material sphere and immaterial sphere, 
1. ***ninitta*** = appearance as form and shape of conditioned things. 

The mindfulness stands well on the nature of momentary cessation (***khaņikanirodha***) called these kinds of phenomena, viz, 

1. ***khaya*  =**  the nature of finishing off 
1. ***vaya  =***  the nature of destruction 
1. ***bheda  =***  the nature of breaking up 
1. ***nirodha  =***  the nature of cessation. ***(Vs-2-277)*** 

It is resulted from the***  phenomena of dissolution only are taken into heart one-sidedly but the phenomena of arising are neglected ***(Mahāţī-2-439)*** 

***Sańkhāra nimitta*** \_\_\_\_\_ Masses of conditioned things which appear as form and shape in the insight of ***meditator***, which are still remain as compactness called compactness of continuity, compactness of form, compactness of function, compactness of object, are called ***sańkhāra nimitta***.  In  the  continuum  of person  who  is  inexperienced  in ***vipassanā*** practice  and  the person who has not reached to the Knowledge of Dissolution although he has experienced to performed  ***vipassanā***  practice,  ***sańńkhāra  nimitta***  (=phenomena  of  conditioned  things) appear as lumps sometimes. 

***\*Khayānupassanam bhāvento ghana saññam pajahati. (Vs-2-264)*** 

***bhāgānupassanato  paţţhāya  tassā  pāripūrīti  ghana  saññāya  pahānamhoti,  tato  pubbe aparipuņņatāya tam na hoti. (Mahāţī-2-417)*** 

In accordance with these commentary and sub-commentary, only when the stage of Knowledge  of  Dissolution  has  been  reached,  it  completes  its  efficiency,  resulting  in abandoning  perception of compactness (***ghanasaññā***). 

Because  disciples  are  able  to  discern  partial  conditioned  things  there  are  either corporeal units which can be kept in mind until ultimate nature or corporeal units which can not be kept in mind until ultimate nature in the insight of disciples. Sometimes lumps of corporeal units, which can not be kept in mind thoroughly, can be found before reaching into the  stage  of  Knowledge  of  Dissolution.  When  the  Knowledge  of  Dissolution  has  been reached, all those lumps of corporeal units disappear and ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge falls on the object of pure ultimate element really. 

Before the Knowledge of Dissolution those lumps of conditioned things can appear as form  and  shape  depending  on  attention  (***manasikāra***)  called  mind-door  adverting consciousness  of  ***meditator***.  Due  to  incomplete  occurrence  of  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge, perception of compactness, which is capable of taking into heart and recognizing on mass of 
PAGE3

corporeality and mass of mentality, can not be abandoned, resulting in appearance as lumps of conditioned things. ***(Mahāţī-2-417)*** 

**PAGE-104** 

In  this  stage  of  knowledge  of  Discerning  Cause  and  Condition  phenomena  of Conditioned things called ***sankharanimitta*** can appear as form and shape based on way of taking into heart called ***manasikara*** of ***meditator*** similarly. 

However those images of concept which are not broken down compactness yet are dissimilar to ***space kasiņa*** concept etc which can not be extracted ultimate element. If the ***meditator*** can keep in mind four great elements occurring in lumps of images of concept systematically, essence of ultimate element can be extracted from those lumps of images of concept really. It means if one can keep in mind four great elements he can find corporeal units  and  then  the  ultimate  nature  of  corporealities  within  those  corporeal  units  can  be scrutinized and kept in mind thoroughly. Mental ***dhammas***, which are occurring depending on those corporeal ***dhammas***, 

` `Which are occurring by taking object or corporeal ***dhammas*** can also be kept in mind easily. 

Due  to  efficiency  of  mind  which  is  habitual  practice  in  the  field  of  concept,  the attention called ***manasikara*** within those mind takes object of lumps of concept, such as "csn I find this way? can I find this image?" etc., resulting in appearance of images of concept. If the ultimate nature can be taken as object again, one can reached into the field of ultimate nature again. It is extraction of essence of ultimate elements from concept really. 

4. **It would be reached to embryo at the moment of conception** 

During backward discerning on past corporeality-mentality in reverse order in most practicing ***meditator***s  the  images  which  had been performed  in  remembrance  with  either wholesome  deeds  or  unwholesome  deeds  can  appear  sometimes.  The  images  with  great pleasantness and the images with great unpleasantness also appear sometimes.  While the images  with  great  pleasantness  are  being  discerned,  the  pleasant  feeling  would  be encountered again. While the images with unpleasantness are being discerned, the unpleasant feeling would be encountered again. It is reflection of past images in present again. 

As  if  pleasant  object  is  encountered  in  present,  pleasant  feeling  arises  or  as  if unpleasant  object  is  encountered  in  present,  unpleasant  feeling  arises,  similarly  \_\_\_\_  by taking  the  past  objects  with  either  pleasantness  or  unpleasantness,  pleasant  feeling  or unpleasant  feeling  arises  in  him.  At  that  time  one  should  put  aside  past  feeling  in  past periodicity and then he should like to try to keep in mind ultimate nature of corporeality- mentality as they really are. 

During keeping in mind corporeality and mentality in that way most ***meditator***s can keep awareness the shape of gradual youth of himself or herself. The image with disagreeable feeling in younghood can also be found sometimes. The image with great agreeable feeling in younghood can also be found sometimes. Every image which may be whatever situation should  like  to  be  scrutinized  as  four  great  elements  within  that  image  and  then  only corporeality-mentality must be kept in mind continuously. 

Only  corporeality-mentality  must  be  kept  in  mind  from  childhood  to  inside  the mother's womb, and then it must be kept in mind from inside the mother's womb to first embryo at the moment of conception gradually. When the first embryo at the moment of conception is kept awareness it is very large in size for some practicing ***meditator***s. It is, actually, not reached into the beginning stage of embryo at the moment of conception. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE66

**PAGE-105** 

In this place it will be presented on about the embryo at the moment of conception in brief as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-1-208)*** 

***(Sam-ti-1-306, 307)*** 

1) **Embryo at the moment of conception** 

It is the name for the first body of self-identity which occurs be means of continuity of underived and derived corporealities from the first mind moment of conception to (7) days after conception. The size of that embryo is the same as the size of accumulating oil drop at the tip of hair of mountain goat from ***Himalaya*** Mountain Range after dipping into oil cup. ***(Abhi-A-2-200, Mūlaţī-2-17, Anuţī-2-23)*** 

2) **According to *Samyuttabhāņaka***  

(=***Mahā Theras*** who memorize all Connected Discourses), It is the same size of oil drop at the tip of twisted three hairs of fetal goat. ***(Sam-A-1-274, Sam-ţī-1-306)*** 

When the practicing ***meditator*** sees continuous occurring lump of embryo by means of   continuity  of  corporeality-mentality  before  breaking  down  compactness,  the  lump  of embryo seems to be large in size. Because the Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition of ***meditator*** is immatured or sometimes lump of embryo is taken into heart by means of concept the embryo at the moment of conception is found as lump. That lump of embryo consists  of  numerous  body  decads.  According  to  explanation  of  commentary  ***(Vs-2-81)***, "***ādāsatalam viya vippsanaattā pasāda rūpam***", those lump of body-decads which are not broken down compactness is clear lump as mirror. 

After scrutinizing four great elements within that clear lump of embryo, if corporeal units only can be found, corporeality-mentality must be kept in mind. Corporeality-mentality must be kept in mind continuously until the beginning of arising of embryo with three kinds of corporeal units, viz., heart-decad, body-decad, sex-decad, which are consisting of (30) kinds of corporealities in total. Those corporeal ***dhammas*** must be distinguished and kept in mind by insight. Then the heart-base consisting in those corporealities must be scrutinized and kept in mind over and over again. Afterwards ***paţisandhi*** mental ***dhammas*** which are occurring  depending  on  that  heart-base  must  be  kept  in  mind  continuously.  Numbers  of mental ***dhammas*** for mankind only are as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. If it is ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling and three roots, it consists of (34) mental ***dhammas***; 
1. If it is ***paţisandhi*** with neutrality feeling and three roots, it consists of (33) mental ***dhammas***; 
1. If it is ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling and two roots, it consists of (33) mental ***dhammas***; 
1. If it is ***paţisandhi*** with neutrality feeling and two roots, it consists of (32) mental ***dhammas***; 
1. If  it  is  ***paţisandhi***  with  neutrality  feeling  and  receiving  consciousness  which  is rootless  wholesome  consequence  ***(ahetuka  kusala  vipāka  upekkhā  santīraņa paţisandhi)***, it consists of (11) mental ***dhammas*** respectively.  

**PAGE-106** 
PAGE5

Three kinds of corporeal units containing (30) kinds of corporealities are corporeal ***dhammas***, while ***paţisandhi*** consciousness and mental concomitants are mental ***dhammas***. In the aspect of aggregate method, those are five kinds of aggregates. By making standard of the person with ***paţisandhi*** with agreeable feeling and three roots, those five kinds of aggregates have to be memorized as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. (3) kinds of corporeal units, (30) kinds of corporealities are \_\_\_\_\_ corporeal aggregate; 
1. the feeling, among (34) mental ***dhammas***, is feeling aggregate; 
1. the perception, among (34) mental ***dhammas***, is perception aggregate; 
1. remaining  (31)  mental  concomitants,  among  (34)  mental  ***dhammas***,  are  formation aggregate; 
1. the consciousness, among (34) mental ***dhammas***, is consciousness aggregate respectively. Thus  there  are  five  kinds  of  aggregates  of  ***paţisandhi***.  Those  are  four  kinds nutriaments belonging to consequence round. 

By sending the knowledge towards past coming-into-existence with the curious mind as "how those twofold corporeality-mentality, fivefold aggregates, fourfold nutriments arise depending upon which kinds of causal ***dhammas***", scrutinize past periodic causal ***dhammas*** with the help of light of wisdom. 

The next method\_\_\_\_\_ When corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** called six bases can be kept in mind until ***paţisandhi***, scrutinize how those six bases arise due to ***paţisandhi*** mind- matter. (In this case the term, mind, refers to only mental concomitants at the moment of ***paţisandhi***.  It  will  be  clearly  understood  later  for  this  next  method  of  assumption.) Afterwards it must be continued to keep in mind how ***paţisandhi*** mind-matter arise due to ***paţisandhi*** consciousness. Then it must be continued to keep in mind how that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises due to which kind of causal ***dhammas*** with the help of curious mind and light of wisdom sending towards past periodicity. 

At that time any kind of performance making wholesome deeds usually appear in the insight.  Either  the  image  of  near  death  or  the  image  with  arising  of  impulsions  usually appears in the insight. Any kind of three emblems, emblem of action, emblem of action performance, emblem of destination, usually appears in the insight sometimes. 

If none of images can appear in the insight, ***paţisandhi*** consciousness of present life must be  kept  in  mind  again.  Then  death-consciousness  of past  life  that  is  contiguous  to present life ***paţisandhi*** consciousness must be scrutinized by insight knowledge. 

If  it  is  also  unsuccessful  or  if  the  image  is  dim  due  to  presence  of  dim  light  of wisdom,  the  concentration  of  fourth  absorption  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  has  to  be developed again until the shining lights become brilliant. This suggestion is intended to say for  those  persons  who  transfer  to  ***vipassanā***  practice  through  the  foundation  of  fourth absorption concentration of mindfulness of breathing. The pith is that acquired degree of concentration, which is fundamental of ***vipassanā*** practice of oneself, must be developed again.  When  the  light  of  wisdom  associating  with  that  concentration  appear  brilliantly scrutinize again with the help of that shining light. The success would be attained. 

**PAGE-107** 

Unless it is successful although one performs in that way, the concentration must be developed in previous way and then both internal and external corporeality-mentality must be kept in mind again. The Knowledge relating to corporeality-mentality must be practiced in order to be clear over and over. Afterwards corporeality-mentality must be kept in mind as mentioned above from four kinds of nutriments belonging to action round as beginning until ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  of  present  life.  When  the  knowledge  reaches  into  ***paţisandhi*** consciousness, the ultimate nature of corporeality-mentality only has to be kept in mind with 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE88

the  purpose  to  know  past  periodic  corporeality-mentality  only.  Corporeality-mentality  of death moment of past life and those of near death consciousness can be found by insight. It usually takes (3-4) days in order to see those corporeality-mentality for some ***meditator***s. It is essential  to  endeavour  over  and  over  again  with  the  help  of  strong  determination  and strenuous effort really. 

Unless it is successful through this method, corporeality-mentality must be kept in mind  again  through  characteristic  (***lakkhaņa***),  function  (***rasa***),  manifestation (***paccupaţţhāna***), proximate cause (***padaţţhāna***) in order to be clear the Knowledge relating to corporeality-mentality. [Way of discerning through characteristic etc., can be seen Section 7, ***Lakkhaņādi Catukka***, ***Volume IV***.] 

After  keeping  in  mind  both  internal  and  external  corporeality-mentality  through characteristic etc., in both continuums of internal and external ones, four kinds of functions, viz., 

1. keeping in mind pure corporeality, 
1. keeping in mind pure mentality, 
1. analyzing corporeality and mentality, 
1. distinguishing and keeping in mind corporeality-mentality, 

must be performed successively. Afterwards corporeality-mentality must be kept in mind through close intervals from four kinds of nutriments belonging to action round which had been  cultivated  with  aiming  to  attain  future  coming-into-existence,  as  beginning  until ***paţisandhi*** consciousness. Then the knowledge has to be sent towards past periodicity with curious mind to know  origin of that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness. If the light of wisdom is sufficient the success would be available. 

5. **Usual experiences of most *meditators*** 

Among various methods mentioned above any kind of methods can lead to succeed for  the  ***meditator***  with  strenuous  effort.  The  efficiency  of  light  of  wisdom  plays  vital important role in discerning causal relationship really. This period is very important to apply strenuous effort of both righteous men and righteous ladies. 

After  keeping  in  mind  corporeality-mentality  of  ***paţisandhi***  of  present  life,  if corporeality-mentality  at  the  moment  of  death  of  past  life  can  not  be  kept  in  mind, corporeality-mentality occurring adjacent to death-consciousness of past life must be kept in mind continuously. During discerning in that way, any kind of images, i.e., 

1. dead image or 
1. the image adjacent to death or 
1. any kind of emblems called emblem of action, emblem of action performance, emblem of destination, which appears at near death-consciousness due to efficiency of action which will give rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** certainly, can be found in the insight of ***meditator***. When the image of corpse and the image near death are found some ***meditator***s are crying during discerning. Even matured man can become wailer during discerning. Those wailful experiences can be found infinitely along with infinite rounds of rebirth really. It will be presented way of practice during seeing those kinds of images. 

If the image of death body is found, four great elements must be scrutinized in that corpse.  When  corporeal units are found the ultimate nature of  corporealities within each corporeal unit must be kept in mind. Those are generally (8) kinds of corporealities with nutriment  as  eight  factor.  If  some  larvae  which  reside  within  the  corpse  are  alive corporealities  produced  by  ***kamma***,  body-decads  etc.,  can  be  found.  Those  all  kinds  of corporealities  must  be  kept  in  mind  collectively  as  "corporeal  ***dhamma***,  corporeal ***dhamma***..". Afterwards corporeal ***dhammas*** at the moment of death-consciousness and near 
PAGE7

death-consciousness  must  also  be  kept  in  mind  continuously.  Then  (54)  kinds  of corporealities within the heart must be kept in mind as priority. Especially heart-base must be distinguished  and  kept  in  mind.  Then  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  which  arises depending upon heart-base must be kept in mind continuously. When life-continuum mind- clear-element  can  be  distinguished  by  insight  observation  on  life-continuum  must  be performed  backwards  and  forwards  over  and  over  again.  This  is  how  discerning  can  be performed when the image of corpse appear in insight. 

If the image of near death appears four great elements must be scrutinized within that image as beginning corporeal ***dhammas***, especially heart-base, must be kept in mind. Then the life-continuum mind-door-element must be kept in mind continuously. Then backwards and  forwards  movement  of  life-continuum  must  be  performed  and  anterior  to  death consciousness and the mind moment of death-consciousness must be observed over and over. 

In both kinds of images, corpse and image of near death, if corporeal ***dhammas*** and life-continuum mind-clear-element are kept in mind over and over in this way, succeeding ways of practice are the same for those images. If any kinds of three emblems called emblem of  action,  emblem  of  action  performance,  emblem  of  destination  is  seen  by  insight, succeeding ways of practice are the same for those practicing ***meditator***s. If neither images of corpse and near death nor three kinds of emblems appears in the insight but only ultimate nature of corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** can be found, it will be no difficulty to find causal ***dhammas***,  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  formation,  action  really.  Therefore  it  will  be presented as a whole from this stage. 

**PAGE-109** 

**3.6.A.  The reason \_\_\_\_\_** 

The reason why the life-continuums at the time of near death are observed over and over through moving backwards and forwards is that \_\_\_\_\_ The objects of emblems which had been taken as object by impulsions of near death consciousness usually appear in that life-continuum  mind-clear-element  of  near  death  due  to  presence  of  efficiency  of  action which will give rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** certainly. Those emblems are any kind of three  emblems  called  emblem  of  action,  emblem  of  action  performance,  emblem  of destination. 

There  is  a  reasonable  question  that  is  it  contradictory  to  explanation  of ***Sangaha Aţţhakathā*** etc., that … 

"***kammabalena  sannam  dvārānam  aññatrasamin  paccupaţţhāti***   =  among  those three kinds of emblems, any kind of emblems can appear in any kind of doors among (6) doors accordingly due to efficiency of action which will give rise to occur resultant ***dhamma*** certainly". It can be answered that it is not contradictory to each other. 

For those emblems appearing at the time of near death, 

1. if it is visible object, it will appear in two doors called eye-door and mind-door; 
1. if it is audible object, it will appear in two doors called ear-door and mind-door; 
1. if it is olfactory object, it will appear in two doors called nose-door and mind-door; 
1. if it is gustative object, it will appear in two doors called tongue-door and mind-door; 
1. if it is tactile object, it will appear in two doors called body-door and mind-door; 
1. if it is ideational object, it will appear in only mind-door, respectively. 

Because  whatever  kind  of  objects  among  six-objects  either  ultimate  ***dhamma***  or concept ***dhamma*** always appear in mind door as natural fixed law, the life-continuum mind-clear-element  is  observed  over  and  over  as  priority.  Only  when  the  life-

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE10

continuum of mind-door can be kept in mind clearly, object of emblem which falls on life-continuum mind-clear-element can be kept in mind again. 

If one ***meditator*** can keep in mind corporeality-mentality etc., which were occurring at the time of death consciousness and near death, any kind of emblems called emblem of action,  emblem  of  action  performance,  emblem  of  destination,  which  is  the  object  of impulsion of  near death consciousness can be kept in mind easily. One should continue to keep in mind that object of emblem. 

**PAGE-110** 

**3.6.B  How does it concern?** 

There is a reasonable question that how does it concern between any kind of three emblems and scrutinizing causal ***dhammas***. The answer is that those are relevant facts each other. 

In accordance with explanation of ***Sangaha Aţţhakathā*** mentioned above, those kinds of emblems can fall and appear in life-continuum mind-clear-element at the time of near death due to presence of efficiency  of action  which will  give rise to occur  consequence ***dhammas***  called  ***paţisandhi***  corporeality-mentality  of  present  life.  Those  emblems  are, therefore, key points of scrutinizing past causal ***dhmma***, action, really. It will be presented an example how it is a key point as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

**3.6.C  Way of appearing of object of emblem of action *Pāli Quotation (Abhidhamattha Sangaha)*** 

Among  numerous  actions  which  had  been  cultivated  and  accomplished  either throughout life or along with the rounds of rebirth, the action which will give rise to occur consequence ***paţisandhi*** of present life which can be said as the other coming-into-existence becomes obvious and more apparent than other actions resulting in facing towards the life- continuum at the time when it is quite close to death. As mentioned above it appears in the life-continuum mind-clear-element. 

In  accordance  with  the  explanation,  “***kammam  pana  atetameva***,  ***tañca manodvāraggahitam”***,  found  in  ***Abhidhammattha  Sangaha  Aţţhakathā***  that  object  of emblem of action, which appears in mind-door, or which is taken as object by mind-door, is a kind of action only which had been accomplished at any time, just before impulsions of near death-consciousness or a moderate far away from near death throughout life or along with the rounds of rebirth. 

Way of appearing of that object of action can accomplish through 

1. ***pubbekata saññā*** 
1. ***sampatikata saññā*** 
1. ***pubbekata saññā -----***  The perception which has been  already done previously is called ***pubbekatasaññā***. If joyful wholesome volition could  

be occurred while any kind of functions of charity, morality, ***samatha***, ***vipassanā*** practices was performing, the ability to recollect that wholesome volition again is way of appearing in mind. 

2. ***sampaţikatasaññā  ----***  The  perception  that  is  performed  recently  is  called ***sampaţikatasaññā***. In the commentary of ***Abhidhammattha***  
PAGE9

***Sangaha***, way of appearing in mind through ***sampaţikatasaññā*** is explained as follows.\_\_\_\_ 

***tameva vā pana janakabhūtam kammam abhinavakaraņavasena dvārapattam hoti. (Abhi- Sangaha, Section of Vīthimutta)*** 

**PAGE-111** 

That definite action called ***janaka kamma*** which has potentiality to give rise to occur consequence ***paţisandhi*** of present life reaches at the life-continuum of mind-door by means of new reperformance again by the time adjacent to death. During reaching, appearing at mind-door in that way it appears by means of new reperformance of unwholesome actions again for the person with woeful destination while it appears by means of new reperformance of  wholesome  actions  again  for  the  person  with  joyful  destination.  For  the  person  with destination of human world, only emblem of wholesome action can appear and then it will be presented an example how emblem of wholesome action appear in mind. That example is a kind of method for scrutinizing past causal ***dhammas***. 

**3.6.D  Way of scrutinizing past causal *dhammas*** 

After  keeping  in  mind  ultimate  nature  of  corporeal  and  mental  ***dhammas***  at  the moment  of  ***paţisandhi***  of  present  life,  in  other  words,  after  keeping  mind  ***paţidandhi*** consciousness of present life the ***meditator*** has to keep in mind life continuum mind-clear- element which was occurring at the moment adjacent to death-consciousness of past life continuously.  That  function  can  be  accomplished  by  keeping  in  mind  heart-base  which occurred at the moment adjacent to death as priority as mentioned above. 

After  keeping  in  mind  the  host  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  which  arises depending on heart-base, if backwards and forwards movements of life-continuum can be performed from a moderate far from death to the period adjacent to death, the object of emblem of action can be found for the ***meditator*** with emblem of action. It is because the object of emblem of action usually appears the life-continuum mind-clear-element at the period adjacent to death really. In this case an example of way of appearing in mind object of emblem of action will be presented as follows. 

During  observing  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  through  backwards  and forwards movement at the period adjacent to death, the practicing ***meditator*** sees four kinds of  actions  which  are  appearing  in  mind  by  means  of  new  reperformance  again.  That practicing person had cultivated various kinds of actions in past life as a ***bhikkhu***. 

These four kinds of emblem of action, i.e.,  

1. an emblem of lecturing action 
1. an emblem of preaching action 
1. an emblem of instructing action 
1. an emblem of practising action, appear inn mind-door at the period adjacent to death. 

Those four kinds of actions are resolute to give rise to occur it’s consequence. Each kind of action must be checked one after another in order to know which kind of action is definite action for consequence ***dhamma***, ***paţisandhi*** etc. 

**PAGE-112** 

Firstly lecturing action has to be checked whether it is definite action. Groups of mental  ***dhammas***  of  wholesome  formations  of  preaching  action,  in  other  words,  mental 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE12

***dhammas*** of continuity of impulsions of great wholesome mind-door cognitive process must be kept in mind. 

Four great elements within the image of lecturing emblem must be discerned firstly. When corporeal units are found ultimate nature of corporeal ***dhammas*** must be analyzed and kept  in  mind  continuously.  Then  heart-base  has  to  be  kept  in  mind  and  the  host  life- continuum mind-clear-element which occurs depending on heart-base during lecturing must be  kept  in  mind  continuously.  The  mind-clear-element  must  be  adjusted  by  moving backwards and forwards at the period far from death and adjacent to death and observation must be performed over and over. (The righteous person with emblem of action at the period adjacent to death of past life should like to perform similar way.) 

**3.6.E  The reasons \_\_\_\_\_** 

There  is  a  reasonable  question  that  why  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  is observed  over  and  over  by  adjusting  backwards  and  forwards.  It  is  because  \_\_\_\_ consciousness of cognitive process usually occurs at the interval of life-continuum mind- clear-element.  Life-continuum  mind  clear  element  usually  arises  again  at  the  end  of consciousness of great wholesome mind-door cognitive process. During lecturing five-doors- cognitive processes can also arise at intervals appropriately in similar way. If life-continuum mind-clear elements can be observed over and over by adjusting backwards and forwards consciousness of cognitive process which are occurring intervals of those life-continuum can be  seen,  distinguished,  kept  in  mind  easily.  In  this  case,  the  pith  ***dhammas***  are  mental ***dhammas***  which  were  occurring  intervals  of  life-continuums.  During  discerning  mental ***dhammas*** of continuity of cognitive process, if life-continuums which are occurring most frequently throughout life are discerned emphatically, mental ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind very easily. If life-continuums can be discerned successfully, mental ***dhammas*** of continuity of cognitive processes which usually occur at the end of life-continuums can be kept in mind easily. 

Afterwards continuity of impulsions of great wholesome mind-door-cognitive process called ***dhammas desana*** (***dhammas*** lecturing volitions) must be kept in mind continuously. If it is successful those wholesome formations group must be kept in mind over and over. Those kinds  of  mind-door-cognitive  processes  can  occur  in  numerous  times.  Those  wholesome volitions are impermanent ***dhammas*** only and they always perish away just after arising. When  those  ***dhammas***  cease,  formations  ***dhammas***  never  cease  without  embedding  any potentiality as consequence and indifferent ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-113** 

Those formations ***dhammas*** usually cease after embedding the efficiency at action which  is  a  kind  of  potentiality  to  arise  desired  coming-into-existence  in  future  with appropriate  opportunity.  Therefore  efficiency  of  action  which  had been  embedded  in  the continuity  of  corporeality  mentality  must  be  scrutinized  by  keeping  in  mind  wholesome formations ***dhammas*** many times. 

This practicing ***meditator*** does not find the relationship between that efficiency of action  and  arising  of  consequence  corporeality-mentality, ***paţisandhi***  mind-matter  etc.,  of present life. 

Similarly when the relationship between efficiency of action of preaching volition and consequence corporeality and mentality of present life, ***paţisandhi*** etc., is observed again he 
PAGE11

sees  correctly  that  preaching  volition  is  also  unable  to  produce  present  life  ***paţisandhi*** consequence corporeality-mentality. 

Furthermore when relationship between efficiency of action of instructing meditation practice  and  consequence  corporeality  and  mentality  of  present  life,  ***paţisandhi***  etc.,  is observed again in similar way he sees correctly that instructing volition is also unable to produce present life ***paţisandhi*** consequence corporeality-mentality. 

Then  that  ***meditator***  was  instructed  to  observe  whether  present  life  ***paţisandhi*** consequence corporeality-mentality arise or not, due to practicing action again. In this case, there are many noticeable facts to be understood clearly, for all practicing ***meditator***s. It will be presented on those facts beforehand as follows. 

**3.6.F  Excert of *Cetanā Sutta*** 

***Pāli Quotation – (Sam-1-295)*** 

**277** 

1. ***Bhikkhus***  …  such  wholesome  volition,  unwholesome  volition  which  can  produce resultant  ***dhammas***  in  three  realms  called  sensual  realm,  fine-material  realm,  immaterial realm, is also accomplished. Such initial application with craving, wrong view in a way that 

… “I want to become man, I want to become woman, I want to become ***bhikkhu***, I want to become preacher ***deva***” etc., is also accomplished. 

**PAGE-114** 

Such element called underlying tendency, underlying tendency of sensual pleasure etc.,  is  also  accomplished.  These  three  kinds  of  ***dhammas***,  volition,  initial  application, element  of  underlying  tendency  are  origin  of  existing  of  action-consciousness  (***kamma viññāņa***) which has efficiency to produce new coming-into-existence in future. If the origin of  existing  of  action-consciousness  are  present  apparently,  the  existing  of  action- consciousness  arises  consequently.  If  that  action-consciousness  exists,  flourished,  the phenomenon  of  arising  called  newly  occurrence  of  coming-into-existence  in  future  is resulted. If the phenomenon of arising called newly occurrence of coming-into-existence in future is present apparently, birth called ***jāti***, ageing and death called ***jarāmaraņa***, sorrow called  ***soka***,  lamentation  called  ***parideva***,  bodily  suffering  called  ***dukkha***,  grief  called ***domanassa***, despair called ***upāyāsa*** arise apparently. Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. 

2. ***Bhikkhus*** … even though such wholesome volition, unwholesome volition which can produce  resultant  ***dhammas***  in  three  realms  called  sensual  realm,  fine-material  realm, immaterial realm is not accomplished;  even though such initial application with craving, wrong view in a way that “I want to become man, I want to become woman, I want to become ***bhikkhu***, I want to become preacher ***deva***” etc., is also not accomplished; if such element  called  underlying  tendency  still  remains,  this  remain  of  element  of  underlying tendency  is  the  origin  of  existing  of  action-consciousness  (***kammaviññāņa***)  which  has efficiency to produce new coming-into-existence in future. If the origin of existing of action- consciousness  are  present  apparently,  the  existing  of  action-consciousness  arises consequently.  If  that  action-consciousness  exists,  flourished,  the  phenomenon  of  arising called newly occurrence of coming-into-existence in future is resulted. If the phenomenon of arising called newly occurrence of coming-into-existence in future is present apparently, birth called  ***jāti***,  ageing  and  death  called  ***jarāmaraņa***,  sorrow  called  ***soka***,  lamentation  called 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE14

***parideva***, bodily suffering called ***dukkha***, grief called ***domanassa***, despair called ***upāyāsa*** arise apparently. Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. ***(Sam-1-295)*** 

In above ***Cetanā Sutta***, 

1. the term, ***cetanā*** (***volition***), must be inferred as mundane wholesome  volition and unwholesome volition which are capable of cycling rounds of rebirth; 
1. the term, ***kappanā***, must be inferred as initial application in a way that “I want to become human being, I want to become heavenly being, I want to become man, I want  to  become  woman”  etc.;  which  always  associates  with  (8)  kinds  of consciousness rooted in greed; which always associates with craving, wrong view; 
1. the term, ***anusaya dhātu***, must be inferred as (7) kinds of elements of underlying tendencies, underlying tendency of sensual pleasure etc. 

***anāgatā  eva  hi  kāmarāgādayo  nipariyāyato  “anusayā”  ti  vattabbatam  arahanti. (Sam-ţī-2-81)*** 

Due to obvious embedding of elements of underlying tendencies within unwholesome volitions,  the  commentary  explained  as  elements  of  underlying  tendencies  embed within unwholesome volition through obvious method. Mundane wholesome volitions are also embedded by those elements of underlying tendencies. ***(Sam-ti-2-81)*** 

**PAGE-115** 

The commentary explained that present ***dhammas*** are embedded by elements of  underlying  tendencies  through  metaphorical  usage  called  same  condition (***sadisūpacāra***).  Future  ***dhammas***,  sensual  desire  etc.,  are  worth  designating  as elements of underlying tendencies definitely. ***(Sam-ţī-2-81)*** 

[**Notes: \_\_\_\_** In ***Abhi-A-3-319, Mahāni-A-205, 206, Paţisam-A-2-8***, it is explained that  those  elements  of  underlying  tendencies  occur  in  three  periods,  Past,  future, present. In ***M-ţī-2-286, 287, Anuţī-3-196, Sam-ţī-2-81, Sārattha-1-75***, it is explained that among three periods, only future period only can be designating as underlying tendency definitely. In Dictionary of **Tipitaka *Pāli*-Myanmar** – ***2-217, ABhi-A-3- 215***,  it  is  explained  that  “Those  elements  of  underlying  tendencies  are  not  worth saying as past, future, present because ***dhammas,*** sensual desire etc., which have not eradicated  by  the  Noble  Path-Knowledge  are  designated  as  ***anusaya***  (underlying tendency) and due to lack of eradication by Noble Path-Knowledge these defilements which are worth eradicating  by the Noble Path ***dhammas***, can be said as “these are still present”.] 

4. The  term,  ***viññāņa***,  must  be  inferred  as  mundane  wholesome  and  unwholesome impulsions which are capable of accomplishing wholesome action and unwholesome action.  Those  impulsions  of  mind-door  cognitive  processes  are  called  action- consciousness (***kammaviññāņa***) because those are occurring associating with volition (=action),  which  has  efficiency  to  produce  new  coming-into-existence  in  future, within same mind moment. 
4. The term, ***punabbhavābhinibbatti***, must be inferred as ***paţisandhi*** consciousness and ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  (***kammabhava***).  ***Paţisandhi***  consciousness  etc  of future coming-into-existence is called consequence consciousness which is produced by action-consciousness. That ***paţisandhi*** consciousness is also called ***punabbhava***. 
PAGE13

***Kamma*** coming-into-existence, which is origin of future ***paţisandhi*** consciousness, is also called ***punabbhava***. 

Causal relationship of above ***dhammas*** are as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to presence of unity of these three ***dhammas***, volition, ***kappanā*** (=initial application), element of underlying tendency, action consciousness (***kammaviññāņa***) arises. Due to presence of action-consciousness, ***kamma*** coming-into-existence and rebirth coming- into-existence,  which  are  called  ***punabbhava***  arise.  This  is  the  essence  of  preaching  of number -1-. 

The essence of preaching of number -2- is as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-ti-2-83)*** 

***(Sam-A-2-66)*** 

=  Even  though  volition  and  ***kappanā  dhamma***  (=initial  application  with  craving, wrong view) are absent apparently, if defilement called element of underlying tendency is embedded  and  still  remain,  due  to  lack  of  removing  by  tweezer  of  the  Noble  Path- Knowledge,  the  action-consciousness  which  has  efficiency  to  produce  new  coming-into- existence in future can arise consequently. 

**PAGE-116** 

It means that \_\_\_\_ in the continuum of practicing person who sees fault of existence and always practices ***vipassanā*** continuously there is neither the volition called endeavouring wholesome and unwholesome actions which can produce new coming-into-existence, nor initial application with craving, wrong view called ***kappanā*** really, before attaining the Path- Knowledge of Arahant. The element of underlying tendency, however, still deposits in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of that ***meditator***. 

[***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-66)*** 

According to explanation of above commentary it must be inferred on elements of underlying tendencies which are depositing in consequence consciousness of both five-door adverting,  receiving,  investigating,  registering  and  ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum,  death consciousness;  sensual  indifferent  consciousness  (***kāmakiriyā  citta***)  called  five-doors- adverting, mind-door adverting, determining consciousness; and corporeal ***dhammas***.] 

Those  elements  of  underlying  tendencies  which  are  depositing  in  consequence ***dhammas***, sensual indifferent ***dhammas***, corporeal ***dhammas*** benefit wholesome impulsions of ***vipassanā*** practice by the efficiency of relation of determinative dependence for arising of action-consciousness which has efficiency to produce new coming-into-existence in future. Due to presence of supporting factor of relation of determinative dependence of underlying tendencies, wholesome impulsions of ***vipassanā*** practice can exist as action-consciousness which can produce new coming-into-existence in future. (It means that although underlying tendencies do not deposit in wholesome impulsions of ***vipassanā*** practice, the latter can exist as  action-consciousness  due  to  presence  of  supporting  factor  of  elements  of  underlying tendencies depositing in consequence, indifferent ***dhamma*** which usually occur intervals of wholesome impulsions of ***vipassanā*** practice and corporeal ***dhammas***.) 

In the next method \_\_\_\_\_ 

***\*kāmam anusayā lokiyakusala cetanāsupi anusentiyeva. (Sam-ţī-2-81)*** 

Because wholesome impulsions of ***vipassanā*** practice are also mundane ***dhammas*** all kinds  of  mundane  wholesome  volition  are  also  deposited  by  elements  of  underlying tendencies.  The  volition  of  ***vipassanā***  practice  of  that  practicing  person  can,  therefore, 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE16

produce ***paţisandhi*** of the next coming-into-existence because that volition is not free from element of underlying tendency. ***(Sam-ţī-2-81)*** 

Due to arising of action-consciousness in that way, ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises in the second future coming-into-existence called “***punabbhavābhinibbatti***”. Furthermore due to  ***kamma***   coming-into-existence  consisting  in  “***punabbhavābhinibbatti***”,  the  arising  of ***paţisandhi*** called birth occurs in the third future coming-into-existence. It was preached with referring to ***“bhava paccayā jāti”*** .This is the way of discerning causal relationship preached in the first ***Cetanā Sutta*** .If the essence of this ***Cetanā Sutta*** can be understood, one can understand easily on  process of wishing for what one wants and principle of dependent origination. 

` `**PAGE-117** 

***3.6.G Defilement round &  action round***  

Among four kinds of actions of practising person mentioned above as example, only the  number  (4)  action,  practising  action,  gives  rise  to  occur  resultant  *dhamas*,  such  as, ***paţisandhi*** consequence consciousness etc. 

That righteous person had practiced both ***samatha***  and ***vipassanā*** in previous life as a ***bhikkhu***.  The  fourth  absorption  concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  had  been cultivated.  Corporeality  mentality  had  been  kept  in  mind  through  that  fourth  absorption concentration  of  mindfulness  of  breathing  as  fundamental  of  ***vipassanā***  practice.  After breaking down compactness of corporeal units and mental units corporeality and mentality had been kept in mind until the field of ultimate reality. However he had no experience to discern principle of dependent-origination resulting in lacking the knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition. ***Vipassanā*** practice had been performed over and over again through generalizing on ultimate nature of corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** as ***anicca, dukkha, anatta***, resulting in improvement of ***Vipassanā*** knowledge. The Noble Path-knowledge, however, can  not  be  reached  at  the  end  of  ***Vipassanā***  knowledge  as  the  experience  of  the  most Venerable  ***Channa Thero*** at the Buddha’s time. 

Due to efficiency of action of formation group consisting in continuity of impulsions of  cognitive  process  of  ***vipassanā***  practice,  the  phenomena  of  arising  of  consequence corporeality-mentality, ***paţisandhi*** etc,of present life” is found by insight knowledge. 

That practising ***meditator*** keeps in mind groups of mental ***dhammas*** of formation- group which are consisting in each impulsion of cognitive processes of ***vipassanā*** practice firstly. Then among those formations groups, specific formations ***dhammas*** which give rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** wore kept in mind again second, he found that it consist of (34) mental ***dhammas***. After words embeded efficiency of action within continuity of corporeality mentality were scrutinized continuously. He found that due to that efficiency of action, both (30)  kinds  of  corporealites  and  (34)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***   arise  at  the  moment  of ***paţisandhi***. 

In this stage, way of discerning would be presented in order to be understood easily. When the ***meditator*** reaches to this stage both internal and external corporeality mentality have been kept in mind thoroughly until the field of ultimate nature. Therefore that ***meditator*** has  been  understood  easily  how  corporealites  produced  by  mind  ***(cittajarūpa)***  arise spreadingly  due  to  meditation  mind  and  how  corporealites  produced  by  nutriment ***(āhārajarūpa)*** arise spreadingly due to presence of nutriments. 

The practising ***meditator*** who has found efficiency of action cultivated in past life must observe how corporealities produced by ***kamma (kammajarūpa)*** arise spreadingly due to presence of that action,  
PAGE15

1. as ***cittajarūpa*** arise spreadingly due to meditation  mind, 
1. as ***utujarūpa*** arise spreadingly due to presence of temperature 
1. as ***āhārajarūpa***  arise spreadingly due to presence of nutriments. 

**PAGE-118**  

It can be performed by alternate discerning on 

1. efficiency of action of past life and 
1. ***kammajarūpa***. (= corporealities produced by ***kamma***), ***paţisandhi kammaja rūpa*** etc, of present life over and over again. If causal relationship between that efficiency of action and ***kammaja rūpa*** of present life is really present, the phenomena of arising of ***kammaja rūpa*** due to that action can be found easily by experiential knowledge of himself. 

During  discerning  on  the  phenomena  of  causal  relationship  between  causal  and resultant  ***dhammas***  in  that  way,  corporeal  units  should  not  be  kept  in  mind  as  resultant ***dhammas***. It is because corporeal units are, actually, lumps of  concept without breaking down compactness, compactness of form etc. After analyzing ultimate nature of corporeal units, causal relationship between efficiency of action and ultimate corporeal ***dhammas*** must be discerned over and over. Causal relationship is present between ultimate nature of causal ***dhammas*** and ultimate nature of resultant ***dhammas*** only. 

Afterwards  the  ***meditator***  should  like  to  observe  phenomena  of  arising  of  mental ***dhammas*** due to presence of efficiency of that action. Alternate discerning must be carried out over and over by scrutinizing causality, the efficiency of action of past life and resultant ***dhammas*** called consequence mental ***dhammas***. When phenomena of arising of ***paţisandhi*** mental ***dhammas*** due to efficiency of action can be seen by  insight principle of dependent- origination can be kept in mind as beginning. [If various emblems of actions appear in insight one  kind  of  actions  is  definite  action  (***janaka  kamma***)  while  remaining  actions  are supportable actions.] 

In above example after seeing the action round the righteous person continues to keep in mind defilement round ***dhammas*** and wishing of that righteous person is as follows. 

Whenever  he  performs  various  kinds  of  wholesome  deeds  and  either  before meditation practice or after meditation practice he usually wishes three kinds, viz, 

1. may become human being, 
1. may become ***bhikkhu*** 
1. may propagate the Buddha’s admonishment respectively. 

Although other kinds of wholesome actions were also cultivated well, those actions has no opportunity to give rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** and then the volition of ***vipassanā*** practice had opportunity to produce consequence ***dhammas***. Although volition and ***kappanā dhammas*** are not present apparently while ***Vipassanā*** Knowledge is occurring incessantly, those  volition  and  ***kappanā  dhammas***  arise  at  intervals  of  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge  in continuum of himself. 

**PAGE-119** 

**3.6.H. Three kinds of defilement rounds** 

1. The ignorance (20) is the nature of wrong knowing as man, ***bhikkhu*** who can propagate the Buddha’s admonishment; 
1. the craving (20) is the nature of heartfelt desire to life of man, life of ***bhikkhu*** who can propagate the Buddha’s admonishment; 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE18

3. the clinging (20) is the nature of firm attachment on life of man, life of ***bhikkhu*** who can propagate the Buddha’s admonishment. (It is also called sensual clinging.) 

[Notes:  \_\_\_\_  These  three  defilements,  ignorance,  craving,  clinging  are  able  to  arise simultaneously within one mind-moment. In this case, frequent arising craving with foothold is called the clinging. The numbers, (20), means kinds of mental ***dhamms*** called unprepared consciousness with agreeable feeling and wrong view rooted in greed (***somanassasahagatta diţţhigata sampayutta asańkhārika lobhamūla citta***). The wrong view of personality is an obsession of self-identity of worldly usage which believes as man, ***bhikkhu*** etc., are present really. Those ignorance, craving, clinging occurred as continuity of impulsions of mind-door cognitive process. With referring to groups of mental ***dhammas*** consisting in each impulsion in which each ultimate nature of mental ***dhammas*** is essential to be discerned, numbers, (20) etc., are added after each defilement round. Numbers of mental ***dhammas*** may be varied, if wrong view is not associated, those become (19); if both kinds of pleasurable interest (***pīti***) and  wrong  view  are  not  associated,  those become  (18)  respectively.  It  is  essential  to be discerned as they really experienced.] 

**3.6.I Two kinds of action round** 

4. Formation (34) are group of wholesome volitions of ***vipassanā*** practice; 
4. action  (***kamma***)  is  the  efficiency  of  action  of  those  (34)  wholesome  volitions  of ***vipassanā*** practice. 

Those  action  round  ***dhammas***  are  also  continuities  of  impulsions  of  mind-door cognitive  processes.  Thus  five  kinds  of  past  causal  ***dhammas***  called  ignorance,  craving, clinging, formation, action have been accomplished to be kept in mind thoroughly. However there are some noticeable facts to be scrutinized and it will be presented as follows. \_\_\_\_ 

**3.6.J. Each object must be same** 

These four kinds of objects, viz, 

1. the object of impulsions adjacent to death of past life, 
1. the object of mental ***dhammas*** of ***paţisandhi*** of present life 
1. the object of mental ***dhammas*** of life-continuum of present life, 

are the same as natural fixed law. 

In practising person who is shown as an example, above mentioned objects are a single object, the emblem of action only. It is the wholesome volition of ***vippassanā*** practice. If the object of impulsions adjacent to death of past life is emblem of action performance (***kamma nimitta***), those objects of mental ***dhammas*** of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death consciousness are also that kind of emblem of action performance ***(kamma nimitta).*** 

**PAGE-120** 

If the object of impulsions adjacent to death of past life is emblem of destination (***gatinimitta***),  those  objects  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum,  death consciousness are also that kind of emblem of destination (***gatinimitta***). There is a reasonable question that—why various kinds of emblems of action appear in ***meditator*** who is shown as example mentioned above even though the object of impulsions adjacent to death of past life is a single. It can be answered that it is because he discerns corporeality-mentality occurring in both periods of a moderate far from death consciousness and quite close period to death consciousness. By the time impulsions adjacent to death arise, only a single object of emblem of action appears lastly in him. 
PAGE17

**3.6.K Same numbers of mental *dhammas*** 

If  volition  group  of  wholesome  formation  cultivated  in  past  life  consists  of  (34) mental ***dhammas***, those mind moments of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death consciousness of present  life  also  each  (34)  mental  ***dhammas***  similarly.  If  volition  group  of  wholesome formations  cultivated  in  past  life  associated  with  mentally  agreeable  feeling,  those  mind moments of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, death consciousness of present life also associate with mentally agreeable feeling and so forth. This is the standard numbers of superior-most- action with three roots (***tihetuka ukkaţţha kamma***) which has been cultivated as excellent quality.  For  inferior  action  with  three  roots  (***tihetuka  omaka  kamma***),  the  numbers  of consciousness and mental concomitants would be reduced because the knowledge can not associate with those consciousness of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum and death. The righteous persons who can accomplish until this stage are generally the person with superior-most- action with three roots. 

6. **L. Life-continuum mind-clear-element** 

Due to ability to discern object of life-continuum mind-clear-element in this stage, mental ***dhammas*** of life-continuum must be kept in mind in order to know exactly how many kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  consist,  by  keeping  in  mind  object  and  depended  base simultaneously. It must be scrutinized over and over whether objects and numbers of mental ***dhammas*** are the same in ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum, and death-consciousness or not. 

**3.6. M. Standardized touchstone**    

There is a reasonable question that how a ***meditator*** can understand whether past continuity of corporeality-mentality are real ones of himself or not. It will be explicit by using example  of  above  ***meditator***.  It  has  been  explained  that  ***meditator***  found  four  kinds  of emblems of actions at the time quite close to death. 

Among those emblems of actions, many other peoples, viz., 

1. in the first object of emblem of action there are images of lecturing person and learning pupils, 
1. in  the  second  object  of  emblem  of  action,  there  are  images  of preaching person  and listening audience, 
1. in  the  third  object  of  emblem  of  action,  there  are  images  of  instructing  person  and learning persons, 

appear in mind-door of that ***meditator***. 

**PAGE-121** 

Although in the side of lecturing person, preaching person or instructing person, the image  occurs  as  a  single  person,  the  other  side,  learning  persons,  listening  audience  or practising persons, occurs many images of persons. Among those images of persons, the ***meditator*** has to scrutinize over and over which continuity of corporeality mentality are of himself correctly. 

During seeing on performance of wholesome formations in this way every person found in insight must be kept in mind as four great elements as beginning one by one. If scrutinized continuity of corporeality-mentality is not oneself, the continuity of corporeality-

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE20

mentality until ***paţisandhi*** of present life of himself and  past continuity of corporeality- mentality are not joining together as a single string. If scrutinized continuity of corporeality- mentality is oneself exactly, that of corporeality-mentality until ***paţisandhi*** of present life of himself and past continuity of corporeality-mentality are joining together as a single string. It does not mean corporeality-mentality are permanent ones but they are arising and passing away successively one after another. If a single continuity of corporeality-mentality can be seen by  insight,  the practising ***meditator***  can  understand  easily past  life-continuum  mind clear-element is himself really. 

**Life-continuum mind-clear-element** 

It is the most frequent occurred, occurring or will be occurring mental ***dhammas*** in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of a being through ort life. In this stage it is essential to  see  a  single  continuity  of  past  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  and  present  life- continuum mind-clear element. 

***Pāli Quotation (Ang-1-9) (Mūlaţī-1-95)*** 

In  accordance  with  above  ***Pāli***  Text  and  sub-commentary,  the  consciousness  of  life- continuum is brillant. All kinds of consciousness are naturally clear and purified but are impurified due to mixing up with defilements which are similar to guests. 

Therefore when the practising ***meditator*** who discerns past continuity of mental ***dhamma*** through the life-continuum mind-clear-element as priority usually sees both continuity of clear life-continuum and continuity of clear consciousness of cognitive processes which are occurring  interval  of  those  life  continuum  mind-clear-elements  as  a  single  continuity continuously. Incessant phenomena of arising and passing away of corporeality-mentality until present continuity of corporeality-mentality of oneself can be found clearly. At that time the practising ***meditator*** understand well the fact that continuity of corporeality-mentality of past life was his continuity of corporeality-mentality really by insight of himself. 

**PAGE-122** 

**3.6.N. Five aggregates of defilement round** 

Above  mentioned  defilement  rounds,  i.e,  ignorance,  craving,  clinging  occurred through sequence of (1) times of mind-door adverting consciousness, (7) times of impulsions, (2) times of registering consciousness. 

1. Mind-door adverting consciousness consists of (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas***; 
1. Each impulsion consciousness consists of (20) mental ***dhammas***; 
1. Each registering consciousness consists of (34) or (12) mental ***dhammas***; respectively. Those mental ***dhammas*** are four kinds of mental aggregates. 
1. (54) kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** including heart-base which are depended corporeality of those mental aggregates are corporeal aggregate. 
1. At the mind moment of the mind-door adverting consciousness, therefore, it consists of five aggregates, (=twofold corporeality – mentality); 
1. At the  mind  moment of each impulsion it  also consists of five aggregates (=twofold corporeality-mentality); 
1. At  the  mind  moment  of  each  registering  consciousness  it  consists  of  five  aggregates (=twofold  corporeality-mentality)  respectively.  Numbers  of  mind  and  mental concomitants of impulsion and registering consciousness can be varied among practising persons.  Registering  consciousness  may  or  may  not  fall  in  those  persons.  Rootless 
PAGE19

consequence  registering  consciousness  or  great  consequence  registering  can  fall accordingly. 

**3.6 O Five aggregates of action round** 

In practising person mentioned above as example, formations and action belonging to action round are volitions of ***vipassanā*** practice. Those action round ***dhammas*** occurred in sequence of, 

1. mind-door adverting consciousness (1) time, it consists of (12) mental ***dhammas***; 
1. impulsions, (7) times, each consists of (34) mental ***dhammas***; 
1. registering consciousness, (2) times, each consists of (34) mental ***dhammas*** respectively through mime-door cognitive process. 

Depended corporeal ***dhammas***, ie, ( 54) kinds of corporealities including heart-base, are corporeal aggregate. 

1. At the mind moment of the mind-door adverting consciousness, therefore, it consists of five aggregates, (=twofold corporeality – mentality); 
1. At the  mind  moment of each impulsion it  also consists of five aggregates (=twofold corporeality-mentality); 
1. At  the  mind  moment  of  each  registering  consciousness  it  consists  of  five  aggregates (=twofold corporeality-mentality) respectively. 

It  has  been  explained  that  registering  consciousness  can  fall  after  immatured impulsions of ***vipassanā*** practice (***taruņavipassanā***) in previous section, ***nāmakammaţţhāna***, Volume II. It does not usually fall in some ***meditator***s but it usually falls in some ***meditator***s. 

**PAGE – 123** 

Numbers of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion and registering consciousness may be varied in different ***meditator***s. Pleasurable interest (***pīti***) can or can not associate in each mind moment. The knowledge can or can not associate in each mind moment. Either agreeable feeling or neutrality  feeling  associates  in  each  mind  moment  of  impulsions  and  registering consciousness.  Either  rootless  registering  or  great  consequence  registering  consciousness with three roots can fall appropriately. 

**3.6.P Five aggregates of consequence round** 

In above section both five aggregates of ***paţisandhi*** and way of discerning on those five  aggregates  have  been  presented.  Those  five  aggregates  of  ***paţisandhi***  belong  to consequence round. The practicing ***meditator*** who has reached into this stage has finished to keep  in  mind  present  five  aggregates  until  ***paţisandhi***  of  present  life.  Among  those  five aggregates consequence round five aggregates are occurring as various kinds, such as five aggregates of life-continuum, five aggregates of five-doors-consciousness, five aggregates of receiving consciousness, five aggregates of investigating consciousness, five aggregates of registering consciousness. It is wide concern really. 

**3.6.Q  The principle of dependent-origination** 

After keeping in mind these five aggregates of defilement round, five aggregates of action round, five aggregates of consequence round, the practicing ***meditator*** can keep in mind principle of dependent-origination as the next step. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE22

\1. Causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how action rounds called formations, action arise due to presence of defilement round called ignorance, craving, clinging. 

1. By seeing the phenomena, 
1) based on mind-door-cognitive process of defilement round, 
1) how  mind-door-cognitive  process  of  action  round  arise  and  then  deducing  must  be performed as… 
1) defilement rounds are causal ***dhammas***, 
1) action rounds are resultant ***dhammas***. 
2. Then, by seeing the phenomena, based on mind-door-cognitive process of action round, how  consequence  round  five  aggregates  of  ***paţisandhi***  arise  and  then  deducing  must  be performed as … 
1) action rounds are causal ***dhammas***, 
1) consequence round are resultant ***dhammas***. It must be kept in mind in this way. 

**3.6.R  In other words\_\_\_\_\_\_** 

When the phenomenon of apparent arising of ***paţisandhi kammajarūpa*** in present life due to presence of past causal ***dhammas***, ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, actions, can be seen by insight causal relationship must be kept in mind in this way. 

**PAGE-124** 

1. Due  to  arising  of  ignorance  (20),  ***paţisandhi  kammajarupa***  arise.  Ignorance  (20)  are causal ***dhammas***, ***paţisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of craving (20), ***paţisandhi kammajarupa*** arise. Craving (20) are causal ***dhammas***, ***paţisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of clinging (20), ***paţisandhi kammajarupa*** arise. Clinging (20) are causal ***dhammas***, ***paţisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of  formation (34), ***paţisandhi kammajarupa*** arise.  Formation (34) are causal ***dhammas***, ***paţisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of action, ***paţisandhi kammajarupa*** arise. 

Action is causal ***dhammas***, ***paţisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind in this way. (Way of keeping in mind in detail would be presented in later.) Thus the practicing ***meditator*** who wants to keep in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** systematically must keep in mind five aggregates of defilement  round  (=  twofold  corporeality-mentality),  five  aggregates  of  action  round  (= twofold  corporeality-mentality),  five  aggregates  of  consequence  round  (=twofold corporeality-mentality), over and over again. It is because \_\_\_\_ it is in accordance with the instruction of commentary of ***Paţisanbhida Magga*** as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

**3.6.S. *Dhammaţhiti ñāņa*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Paţisam-A-1-18)*** 

Above  explanations  are  relating  to  the  definition  as  "***paccayapariggaha  paññā dhammaţhitiñāņam***" = the wisdom which occurs through keeping in mind causal ***dhammas*** is called ***dhammaţhitiñāņa (Paţisam-1)***, found in ***Pāli*** Text of ***Paţisanbhidā Magga***. The essence of those explanations of commentary is as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 
PAGE21

If  there  is  a  question  that\_\_\_\_\_  Why  it  is  called  ***dhammaţhitiñāņa***  without designating  as ***nāmarūpavavatthāna ñāņa*** which is capable of analyzing and  keeping in mind corporality-mentality, the answer is as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-125** 

Resultant  ***dhammas***  called  ***paccayuppanna  dhamma***  depend  on  causal  ***dhammas*** called ***paccaya dhamma***. Those arise apparently due to presence of causal ***dhammas*** only. Group of causal ***dhammas*** which are origin, causality of arising of resultant ***paccayuppanna dhamma***  are  called  ***dhammathiti***.  The  penetrative  knowledge  on  those  group  of  causal ***dhammas***  which  are  origin  of  resultant  ***paccayuppanna  dhammas***  are  called ***dhammathitiñāņa***. 

This  knowledge  called  ***dhammaţhitiñāņa***  arises  in  the  continuum  of  righteous practicing person who has acquired mind-matter which have been distinguished and kept in mind  thoroughly  after  endeavouring  on  ***rūpakammaţţhāna,  nāmakammaţţhāna***  for  right knowing and seeing on ultimate nature of corporeality-mentality as they really are, through mind  of  meditation  associating  with  either  access  concentration  or  full  absorption concentration, by the time causal ***dhammas*** of those mind-matter are penetratively known and seen by right knowledge because causal ***dhammas*** of those mind-matter are distinguished and kept in mind thoroughly. 

Furthermore, as mentioned above over and over, those causal ***dhammas*** are also five aggregates (= twofold corporeality-mentality) called defilement round and five aggregates (= twofold corporeality-mentality) called action round only. There is no causal ***dhamma*** free from mind-matter. There is a reasonable question that why the knowledge that is capable of distinguishing  and  keeping  in  mind  causal  ***dhammas***  called  corporeality-mentality  is designated  as  ***dhammaţţhitiñāņa***  but  not  ***nāmarūpavavatthā  ñāņa***  (=  the  knowledge  of distinguishing  Mentality-Corporeality).  The  commentary  of  ***Paţisanbhidhā  Magga*** mentioned above answered and explained on that question as follows.)\_\_\_\_\_ 

**The answer\_\_\_\_\_** Unless resultant mind-matter called ***paccayuppanna dhamma*** are kept in mind and distinguished by insight, the knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition called ***paccayapariggahañāņa*** can not be occurred. 

As mentioned above, these ***dhammas*** which are designated as past causal ***dhammas***, viz., 

1. five aggregates (= twofold corporeality-mentality) called defilement round which are led by ignorance, craving, clinging and 
1. five aggregates (= twofold corporeality-mentality) called action round which are led by wholesome volitions, also have respective causal ***dhammas***. Those group of mind-matter called  defilement  round  and  action  round  never  arise  spontaneously  without  any  causal ***dhammas***. In the aspect of ultimate nature of conditioned things, there is no ***dhamma*** which arises spontaneously. 

Thus  due  to  occurrence  of  ultimate  ***dhammas***  of  conditioned  things  which  arise depending on causal ***dhammas***, those group of mind-matter called defilement round, action round are also called resultant ***dhammas***, if those are observed in the aspect of respective causal ***dhammas*** in turn. 

**PAGE-126** 

1. ***āsavasamudayā  avijjāsamudayo  (M-1-67)***  =  In  accordance  with  the  preaching  by  the Buddha that "due to presence of taint ***dhammas*** (***āsava dhamma***), the ignorance arises 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE24

apparently",  taint  ***dhammas***  are  causal  ***dhammas***,  while  the  ignorance  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. ***vedanā paccayataņhā\_\_\_\_\_*** In accordance with the preaching that "due to presence of feeling, the craving arises", the feeling is causal ***dhamma*** called ***paccaya dhamma***, while, the craving is resultant ***dhamma*** called ***paccayuppanna dhamma***. 
2. ***taņhā paccay upādānam\_\_\_\_\_*** In accordance with the preaching that "due to presence of craving, the clinging arises", the craving is causal ***dhamma***, while the clinging is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. ***avijjāpaccayā sańkhārā***\_\_\_\_\_ In accordance with the preaching that "due to presence of ignorance  which  is  nescience  on  Four Noble  Truths, formations  arise  apparently",  the ignorance is causal ***dhamma***, while the formations are resultant ***dhammas***. 
2. ***upādāna paccayā bhavo\_\_\_\_\_*** In accordance with the preaching that “due to presence of clinging,  ***kamma***  coming-into-existence  (rebirth  coming-into-existence)  arise”,  the clinging is casual ***dhamma*** while ***kamma*** coming-into-existence (= action) is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Thus ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action which are designated as past causal ***dhammas***, in other words, group of mind-matter which are led by ignorance, craving, clinging,  formation,  action  also  have  their  respective  past  causal  ***dhammas***.  Thus  in  the aspect of respective causal ***dhammas***, if consideration can be performed, lumps of mind- matter  which  are  led  by  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  formations,  action  can  also  be designated as resultant ***dhamma*** called ***paccayuppanna dhamma***. 

Unless those groups of mind-matter called defilement round and action round which were arisen based on respective causal ***dhammas*** are kept in mind previously, the ***meditator*** can not know how consequence mind-matter, ***paţisandhi*** consequence consciousness etc., arise in present life due to presence of those groups of mind-matter, in other words, due to presence  of  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  formations,  action  which  are  called  defilement round,  action  round.  The  principle  of  causal  relationship  between  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas*** can not be understood and kept in mind anymore resulting in inability to attain the Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition. 

**In the next method** \_\_\_\_ Unless mind-matter belonging to defilement round which are led by past ignorance, craving, clinging, are kept in mind thoroughly, it is unable to know the arising of action rounds called formations, action, due to presence of those defilement rounds really. Again unless groups of mind-matter belonging to action rounds called formations, action  are  kept  in  mind,  it is  unable  to  know  how  consequence  round  called ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises in present life, due to presence of those action rounds. 

**PAGE-127** 

Furthermore unless that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness is kept in mind, it is unable to keep in mind how ***paţisandhi*** mind-matter arise due to presence of that ***paţisandhi*** consciousness. Then unless those ***paţisandhi*** mind-matter are kept in mind, it is unable to keep in mind how six bases arise, due to presence of those mind-matter. It should be understood in this way. 

Therefore  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  the  knowledge  of  Distinguishing Mentality-Corporeality  (***nāmarūpa  vavatthānañāņa***),  which  must  be  accomplished 
PAGE23

beforehand for attainment of ***dhammaţţhitiñāņa***, has already been preached by using the term, ***dhammaţţhitiñāņa*** but not ***nāmarūpavavatthānañāņa.*** 

If it is so there is a reasonable question that why not preach in a way as "***samādahitvā paccayapariggaha paññā  dhammaţţhiñāņam***   =  the  wisdom  on  keeping  in  mind  causal ***dhammas***  after  attaining  concentration"  is  called  ***dhammaţţhiñāņa***,  as  the  second,  the Knowledge through virtue (***sīlamayañāņa***), the third, the Knowledge through concentration practice (***samādhibhāvanāmayañāņa***). 

The  answer  is  that  \_\_  it  is  due  to  ***samatha***  practice  and  ***vipassanā***  practice  are deserving to develop by yoking method. 

"If ***vipassanā*** practice will be performed after developing concentration; similarly if the ***meditator*** who performs ***vipassanā*** practice develops concentration again, both ***vipassanā*** practice and ***samatha*** practice have balanced efficiency. As two bulls are yoking together with a yoke, ***samatha*** practice and ***vipassanā*** practice occur as yoking together". 

It was preached in this way. (Yoking method called ***yuganaddhanaya*** will be explicit in detail in Section of ***vipassanā***, **Volume V, page 366-372**) 

Therefore  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  that  it  has  been  preached "***paccayapariggaha paññā dhammaţţhitiñāņam*** = the wisdom which occurs through keeping in  mind  causal  ***dhamma***  is  called  ***dhammaţţhitiñāņa***  in  order  to  know  that  "both concentration and knowledge are worth developing through yoking method until reaching to the Noble Path". ***(Paţisam-A-1-18)*** 

**PAGE-128** 

This is the essence of above explanation of commentary of ***Paţisambhidā Megga***. 

During scrutinizing causal ***dhammas*** of present life's ***paţisandhi*** consciousness, the righteous ***meditator***  should,  therefore,  scrutinize  groups  of  mind-matter  called  defilement rounds  and  causal  ***dhammas***  of  that  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  beforehand.  He  must endeavour to know and see penetratively on those ***dhammas*** by experiential knowledge. If those are known and seen penetratively by insight, mind-matter must be distinguished and kept in mind beforehand in order to breakdown each kind of compactness of those defilement round,  action  round ***dhammas***  and  to  attain  the  Knowledge  of  Distinguishing  Mentality- Corporeality. 

After  accomplishing  those  functions,  the  function  of  keeping  in  mind  on  causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** must be carried out through seeing phenomena of arising of  present  life's  ***paţisandhi***  consciousness  etc.,  belonging  to  consequence  round,  due  to presence  of  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  formations,  action  which  belong  to  defilement rounds and action rounds respectively. 

In  other  words  \_\_\_\_\_  by  seeing  how  action  rounds  arises  due  to  presence  of defilement rounds and then by seeing how consequence rounds arise in present life due to presence of those action rounds, principle of dependent-origination has to be kept in mind continuously. These are precautional rules for the righteous ***meditator*** who wants to discern and keep in mind principle of dependent-origination. 

**3.6.T  Five aggregates menas** \_\_\_\_\_ 

As five aggregates called four kinds of nutriments belonging to action round which has been cultivated in present life for attainment of preacher ***deva's*** life in future are parts of present five aggregates which are incessant occurring throughout present life, it should be understood similarly, five aggregates called defilement round and action round which had been cultivated in past life were also parts of past five aggregates only. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE26

**3.6.U  Differences between each defilement round and each action round** 

Although the usage of ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action are the same among practicing persons, the phenomena of state of affairs are varied each other. Different kind of ignorance, different kinds of craving, different kinds of clinging, different kinds of formations and actions occur for different persons. 

Some  want  to  become  woman  while  some  want  to  become  man,  *bhikkhu*,  nun, mankind, ***deva*** respectively. 

Even though one was gentleman in past life, he had prayed for attainment of woman's life due to presence of wearisomeness to serve dependants. 

**PAGE-129** 

Even though the other was woman in past life, she had prayed for attainment of man's life, due to presence of loathsomeness on that woman's life. Ignorance, craving, clinging are varied in each other. Due to differences in that way, resultant ***dhammas*** are varied depending on different kinds of ignorance, craving and clinging which were surrounding formations and actions. As their respective wishes, most practicing ***meditator***s are found that one became woman, one became man, one became *bhikkhu*, one became nun, one became human, one became heavenly being respectively. 

Furthermore, in the aspect of formations, actions, it can be found that the formation and action of meditation practice gave rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** in some ***meditator***s while those of moral wholesome deeds gave rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** in some, and those of charity gave rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** respectively. 

Then in the aspect of charity, some has got consequence ***dhamma*** through flowers offering wholesome action while some has got consequence ***dhammas*** through alms food offering, or, open oil lamp offering  and so forth. In this way accepted persons, offering materials, way of offering manner etc., are also varied in different persons. 

Every living being has specific kinds of ignorance, craving, clinging, formation and action  respectively  although  terminological  usage  of  those  ignorance,  craving,  clinging, formation, action are identical in each other. 

Due to presence of significance difference in actions, such variations, form and shape of man, form and shape of woman, form and shape of human, form and shape of ***deva***, forms and shapes of different sex etc., would be occurred. Due to variation in forms and shapes of different sex, significant variation in perceptions, such as perception of man, perception of woman, perception of human, perception of ***deva*** etc., would be occurred. Due to variations in perceptions, significant variations of terminological usage such as, man, woman, human, ***deva***, brahma etc., would be occurred. Due to variations in terminological usage, variations in initial  application  with  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  (wrong  view)  which  are  called "***kappanā***"  would  be  occurred.  Variations  of  minds  associating  with  ignorance,  craving, clinging are called wonderful nature of consciousness. Due to presence of wonderful nature of consciousness, formations and actions which were cultivated by beings would be very strange. Due to presence of wonderful nature of formations and actions, forms and shapes of beings  would  be  strange  resulting  in  becoming  as  specific  kind  with  acquired  different consequence ***dhammas***. ***(Abhi-A-1-107 ,108)*** 

In this case, evidence of stories would be presented in order to both understand clearly how consequence ***dhammas*** are wonderful nature due to variations in ignorance, craving, clinging,  formations,  actions  and  attain  help  in  scrutinizing  past  causal  ***dhammas***  for practicing ***meditator***s. 

**PAGE-130** 
PAGE25

**3.7.A  Previous whishes of Sumana princess** 

***Sumanā  rājakumārīti  mahāsakkāram  kattvā  patthanam  patthettvā  evam  laddhanāmā rājakaññā. (Ang-A-3-13)*** 

***Sumanā*** princess was a famous daughter of King ***Kosala***. She was a princess who has got the name, ***Sumanā*** through great offering and wishing. 

At the time of the Supreme Buddha called ***Vipassī***, when the people of country got opportunity to offer the Buddha and sanghas, the Supreme Buddha associating with hundred thousands ***Bhikkhus*** came to Commander-in-Chief's house at the first day for alms food. A lady who was one destined to be ***Sumanā***  princess was waiting for the Supreme Buddha at a midway and offered the Supreme Buddha rice porridge with pure milk putting inside the golden bowl covered with another golden bowl which was full of garlands of star ipomea (***Ipomea,  coccinea***) which are called ***Sumanā*** and then she prayed as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Ang-A-3-13, 14)*** 

"If  I  have  to  become  various  coming-into-existence,  may  never  be  worried  in livelihood, may I become a woman who is adored by all people, namely ***Sumanā*** only in every kind of coming-into-existence". \_\_\_\_\_ 

If above wholesome action and whishes are checked, it can be found those consist of both defilement rounds and action rounds completely. 

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as woman, namely ***Sumanā***, whose livelihood is free from worry, who is worth adoring by all people. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that woman's life. 
1. Clinging is the nature if strong attachment on that woman's life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volitions of offering of rice porridge with pure milk and star ipomea to the Supreme Buddha called ***Vipassī*** and ***Bhikkhus***. 
1. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition group. 

These five kinds of causal ***dhammas*** are origin of consequence aggregates, ***paţisandhi*** five  aggregates  of ***Sumanā*** princess,  daughter  of  king ***Kosala***,  according  to  explanations found in commentary of ***Anguttara*** ***Nikāya*** mentioned above. 

**3.7.B  Previous wish of *Ummāhdantī*** 

After offering white garb which has been attained after serving as a slave for three years to a *bhikkhu*, a disciple of ***Kassapa*** Buddha, who lost his robe by thieves, a lady who was one destined to be ***Ummadanti*** prayed as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Jātaka-A-5-223)*** 

"Venerable Sir… if I have to become various coming-into-existence, may I become a woman with the most beautiful appearance, if every man see me may that man be unable to perform according to his desire as natural situation, may there none other woman who is more beautiful than me be present in every life". 

This is previous wishes of a lady who was one destined to be ***Ummāhdantī***. Due to that wishes, in the life of ***Ummāhdantī*** she became the most beautiful woman and every man who saw her, including King ***Sivi***, can not perform according to his desire as natural situation of himself, resulting in insane bodily action, verbal action and insane mental action. 

In this case, 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE28

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as woman with the most beautiful appearance, who is able to cause insane manner of every man who see her. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that woman's life. 
1. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment on that woman's life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volitions of offering of white garb to *bhikkhu*. 
1. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition groups. 

Thus five kinds of causal ***dhamma*** were completed. Due to completion of causal ***dhammas***, resultant ***dhammas*** were also arisen completely. Due to presence of wonderful mind, action becomes wonderful. Due to wonderful action, beings have wonderful forms and shapes. 

* ***ijjhati bhikkhava sīlavato cetopaņidhi visudhattā. (Ang-3-71)*** 

***Bhikkhus*** … due to purification of virtue, every heartfelt desire could be fulfilled for virtuous person certainly. ***(Ang-3-71, Dānūpapatti Sutta)*** 

**PAGE-132** 

**3.7.C  Previous wish of *Pabhāvatī*** 

In one life a lady who was one destined to be ***Pabhāvatī*** had got married with elder brother. The younger brother was a gentleman who was one destined to be king ***Kusa***, and he lived together with his brother's family. One day they baked a kind of delicious snack and the whole family ate it, but younger brother is absent at that time and they set aside some snacks for him. 

At that time one ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha*** had arrived for alms food in front of their house. Elder brother's wife offered ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha*** some snacks which was set aside for younger brother. At that time the younger brother returned back and took offered snack from ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha's*** bowl, due to presence of anger with his sister-in-law. 

Elder brother's wife took some butter from her mother's house and offered again the ***Pacceka***  ***Buddha***.  When  she  saw  shining  lights  produced  by  butter  inside  the  bowl  she prayed pleasantly as follows. \_\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Jataka-A-5-306)*** 

"Venerable  Sir  …  due  to  efficiency  of  this  offering,  may  my  body  can  produce shining lights in every life, may I become a woman with the most beautiful appearance, may never dwell together with this vicious man in every life". 

In these wishes of a woman who was one destined to be ***Pabhāvatī***, 

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as woman with the most beautiful appearance and shining lights. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that woman's life. 
1. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment on that woman's life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volition of offering of butter to the ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha***. 
1. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition groups. 

Thus five kinds of causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action, are completed. 

***Pāli Quotation (M-3-300)*** 
PAGE27

The donor with these four kinds of factors, viz., 

1. presence of right moral conduct, 
1. occurrence of donated materials as legally obtained ones, 

**PAGE-133** 

3. presence of purified mind, 
3. presence of firm faith on action and consequence of action, offers his own materials to  
3. virtuous, righteous persons. 

I would like to preach that kind of offering has great prosperous effects really. ***(M-3- 300)*** 

In accordance with preaching of ***Dakkhiņavibhanga*** ***Sutta*** mentioned above, donation of a woman who was future ***Pabhāvatī*** was completed with five factors mentioned above. In the aspect of the person who accepts offerings, the standard of virtue  was excellent one because it was the virtue of the ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha***. Due to completion of factors of both aspects, donor and the person who accepts offerings, she became the most beautiful woman with shining light as she wished for the period when that donation gave rise to occur resultant ***dhamma***. 

**3.7.D  Previous wishes of King Kusa** 

When he heard the wish of his brother's wife, the younger brother, a man who was one destined to be King ***Kusa***, offered his share, some snack that were taken from  the bowl to the ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha*** again and then he prayed as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Jataka-A-5-306)*** 

"Venerable Sir … even if this lady lives in wherever place far from hundred ***yojana*** (= measure of distance equal to 12.72 miles), may I become a gentleman who is able to bring and make servitor to her". \_\_\_\_ 

These were previous wishes of King ***Kusa***. In this offering ceremony, the man who was one destined to be King ***Kusa*** cultivated actions by surrounding with craving to the woman who was one destined to be ***Pabhāvatī***. 

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as man who is able to bring and make servitor to the woman, even if she live at the place far from hundred ***yojana***. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that man's life. 
1. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment on that man's life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volition of offering of some snack to the ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha***. 
1. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition groups. 

**PAGE-134** 

In this donation ceremony, it is also completed with five kinds of causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action. 

***Pāli Quotation (Jātaka-A-5-306)*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE30

In  that  donation  ceremony  the  man  who  was  one  destined  to  be  King  ***Kusa***  had retaken some snack from ***Pacceka*** ***Buddha's*** bowl with anger. Due to efficiency of action surrounded by that anger he becames the ugliest person in King ***Kusa's*** life. Depending on attachment to beautiful lady ***Pabhāvatī*** he became miserable person. Then in the aspect of ***Pabhāvatī***, due to cultivating seeds of wholesome actions with non-desire to King ***Kusa***, she never want to marry  him. However, due to  cultivating seeds of wholesome actions with heartfelt desire to get married ***Pabavati***, in the King ***Kusa's*** life when those actions give rise to occur resultant ***dhammas***, he faced with many shameful problems relating to ***Pabhāvatī***. He had got married ***Pabhāvatī*** through various tactics. 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-123)*** 

***Bhikkhus*** … I (the Buddha) never see any group of wonderful beings other than animal beings which are the most wonderful ones. ***Bhikkhus*** … those animal beings have wonderful form and shapes due to presence of wonderful mind called ***kamma*** ***vinñāņa*** (= action consciousness) only. ***(Sam-2-123, Gaddulabaddha Sutta)*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-A-2-299)*** 

***(Sam-ţī-2-253)(Mūlaţī-1-66)*** 

The  consciousness  which  is  associating  with  various  wholesome  or  unwholesome formations in the same mind moment for each being is called ***kamma*** ***vinñāņa*** (= action consciousness). That mind called ***kamma*** ***vinñāņa*** is very wonderful due to craving called ***taņhā***. In other words, due to presence of wonderful initial application called ***kappanā*** which is associating with ignorance, craving, clinging, that action consciousness becomes wonderful by  means  of  saying  as  inevitable  method  called  ***avinābhāvanaya***.  It  should  be  noticed differences of ignorance, craving, clinging and manner of ***kappanā*** which had been occurred in the continuum of the woman who was one destined to be ***Pabhāvatī*** and the man who was one destined to be King ***Kusa***. 

**PAGE-135** 

That  action  consciousness,  in  the  next  method,  the  volition  associating  with  that action consciousness has potentiality to produce new coming-into-existence in future. That action  consciousness,  in  the  next  method,  the  volition  associating  with  that  action consciousness  only  is,  therefore,  called ***kamma***  (=  action).  Therefore  it  is  explained  that "***kammañhi*** ***cittato*** ***nibbattam*** = wonderful action is conditioned by craving, the craving is produced by mind." 

There is no endeavouring as "it will become wonderful in this way" for forms and shapes of some animals, such as quail, partridge etc. Due to presence of wonderful action only, they becomes wonderful animals. 

The  action  (***kamma***)  performs  to  reach  ***paţisandhi***  called  conception  (***yoni***).  The action which can give rise to occur biped performs to reach ***paţisandhi*** called conception which can produce biped. The action which can give rise to occur quadruped performs to reach ***paţisandhi*** called conception which can produce quadruped. The action which can give rise to occur either handsome gentleman or pretty lady performs to reach ***paţisandhi*** called conception which can produce either handsome gentleman or pretty lady. The action which can give rise to occur ugly appearance performs to reach ***paţisandhi*** called conception which can produce ugly appearance and so forth. 
PAGE29

Therefore wonderful forms and shapes of various beings are produced by conception (= ***paţisandhi***) to which the action performs to reach accordingly. It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ All beings who enter into conception (= ***paţisandhi***) usually occur as similar form and appearance of parents  really.  Wonderful  forms  and  appearance  of  off  springs  are  due  to  conception  (= ***paţisandhi***)  and  then  wonderful  forms  and  appearance  of  conceptions  (= ***paţisandhi***)  are accomplished by actions. Thus, if the parents are bipedal animals, off springs are also bipedal animals and if the parents are quadrupedal animals, off springs are also quadrupedal animals. If parents have beautiful forms and shapes, off springs also have beautiful forms and shapes. If parents have ugly forms and shapes, off springs also have ugly forms and shapes. It can be noticed the same personality of off springs and parents. Wonderful action is conditioned by craving, the craving is produced by mind. Therefore only the mind which is the origin of action  and ***paţisandhi***  is  more  wonderful  than  beings  who  reach  into  various  action  and ***paţisandhi*** really. ***(Sam-2-123, Sam-A-2-299, Sam-ţī-2-253)*** 

__3.7.E  Previous wishes of her ladyship, *Subhaddā*__* 

Once upon a time the Supreme Buddha stayed at the monastery, ***Jetavanna***. During preaching Noble ***dhamma***, the Buddha was sitting on the throne and produced (6) kinds of aureole, i.e., brown, gold, red, white, somber and coruscating hues. The Lord Buddha's sound is similar to the sound of King brahma and the appearance with noble gentleman's (32) kinds of characters as major and (80) kinds of characters as minor. Among the audience who were listening ***Dhamma*** respectfully, a young *bhikkhuni* was also included and she was thinking about that "did I become as a 

**PAGE-136** 

servitor at the base of feet of this Noble Gentleman along with the rounds of rebirth," and then  the  knowledge  of  Recognizable  Previous  Lives  called  ***jātissarañāņa***  arose  in  the continuum of that young *bhikkhuni* at that time. When she recollected her previous lives with the  help  of  the  knowledge  of  Recognizable  Previous  Lives,  she  found  she  had  become servitor  at  the  base  of  feet  of  the  King  Elephant  called  ***Chaddanata's***  life,  resulting  in occurring great pleasantness in the continuum of young *bhikkhuni*. However she continued to think about herself as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Jataka-A-5-37)* PAGE-136 Contd….** 

“In all servitors at the base of feet [= wife who helps her husband to attain ten kinds of perfections (***pāramitta***)], a few persons only have individual preference to fulfil welfare their husbands but most of them are lacking individual preference to fulfil that of their husbands really. I want to know whether I, myself, was the one who had individual preference to fulfil welfare of this Noble Gentleman or not…” thought by the young *bhikkhunī*. At that time she remembered  that  she  was  the  one  without  individual  preference  to  fulfil  welfare  of partnership  and  harboured  a  grudge  depending  on  case  of  no  importance,  resulting  in breaking down in tears. Than the Lord Buddha preached the story of the King of elephant called ***Chaddanta***. 

The king elephant, ***Chaddanta***, was surrounded by eighty thousands elephants which all were kind of ***uposatha*** that can fly in the sky. The King elephant, ***Chaddanta***, had got two 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE32

queens called ***Cūļasubhaddā*** and ***Mahāsubhaddā. Cūļsubhaddā*** was the queen elephant who was one destined to be the young *bhikkhunī*. 

All elephants led by the King elephant, ***Chaddanta***, went on a royal game in sal forest in which indigenous hardwood tree bearig sprays of fragrant, red flowers at one day in early summer. ***Cūļasubhaddā*** stood at windward while ***Mahāsubhaddā*** stood at downwind, either side of the king elephant that was playing in middle one. The King elephant, ***Chanddanta***, rubbed a sal tree which was covered with flowers entirely by forehead. At that time dry foliage and red ants fell from the tree onto the body of ***Cūļasubhaddā*** while pollens, petals, sepals of sal flowers fell onto the body of ***Mahāsubhaddā***. At that time ***Cūļasubhaddā*** that dislike  the  King  elephant’s  behaviour  bore  a  grudge  “this  King  elephant  causes  to  fall pollens, petals, sepals onto his beloved wife’s body but he causes to fall dry foliage and red ants onto my body, let  be it, he must understand one day.” (***Jātaka-A-5-39,40***) 

**PAGE-137** 

Furthermore at one day the King elephant, ***Chaddanta*** went down into the lake called ***Chaddanta (chaddanta daho)*** in order to play aquatic game. During playing very happily in the water one elephant who was wandering and playing in the lake, ***Chaddanta***, brought a wonderful lotus flower called ***sattuddaya*** and then he offered the King elephant that lotus flower.  At  that  time  the  King  elephant  spread  pollens  of  that  lotus  flower  out  onto ***Mahāsubhddā’s***  body  and  then  he  gave  it  as  present  for  her.  After  seeing  that  manner ***Cūļasubhaddā*** bore a grudge again second time on the King elephant, ***Chaddanta*** who was one destined to be the Supreme Buddha. 

During that period all elephants led by the King elephant had got opportunity to serve (500) numbers of the ***Pacceka Buddha*** with very sweet and juicy fruits, petioles of lotus with great flavour and fresh water. At a day all elephants offered the ***Pacceka Buddha*** with very sweet and juicy fruits.  In that donation ceremony ***Cūļasubhaddā*** also included and  after offering some fruit she prayed in this way. 

***Pāli Quotation (Jātaka-A-5-40)*** 

1. Venerable Sir… due to presence of this wholesome deed, when I passes away, may I become the princess called ***Subhaddā*** in the royal lineage of ***Maddarāja*** 
1. When I come of age may I become beloved chief queen of King ***Bārāņasi***. 
1. May I become and efficacious woman who is persuasive as indulgence of myself this King ***Bārāņasi***. 
1. May I kill this King elephant called ***Chaddanta*** by throwing with poisoned arrow of one hunter through urging the King ***Bārāņasi***. 
1. May I become an efficacious women who can arrange to bring a pair of tusks with six kinds of shining rays. 

These were various wished of ***Cūļasubhaddā***. 

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as a woman called ***Subhaddā*** the princess of the  King ***Maddarāja***, who was beloved  chief queen of the  King ***Bārāņasi***, who was persuasive as indulgence of herself to King ***Bārāņasi***, who can kill the King elephant by throwing poisoned arrow, who can arrange to bring a pair of tusks with six kinds of shining rays. 

**PAGE-138** 
PAGE31

2. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that woman’s life. 
2. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment on that woman’s life. 
2. Formations  are  groups  of  wholesome  volition  of  offering  of  fruits  to  the  ***Pacceka Buddha***. 
2. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition groups. 

In this donation ceremony, it was also completed with five kinds of causal ***dhammas***, ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action. All elephants led by the King ***Chaddanta***, including ***Cūļasubhaddā*** had got purified virtue. They had opportunity to offer the ***Pacceka Buddhas*** who were virtuous Noble Ones with fruits which were lawfully obtained things through firm faith on action and consequence of action. They had opportunity to cultivate the seed of wholesome deed on to the fertile field of Noble Ones resulting accomplishing all kinds of wishes of ***Cūļasubhaddā*** at one day. 

She become the princess of the King ***Maddarāja***; she become beloved chief queen of the King ***Bārāņasi***; she became an efficacious woman who was persuasive as indulgence of herself the King ***Bārāņasi***; she became a woman who could kill the King elephant called ***Chaddanta***  by  throwing  with  poisoned  arrow  of  one  hunter;  she  become  an  efficacious woman who can arrange to bring a pair of tusks with six kinds of shining rays. However when  a  pair  of  tusks  of  the  King  elephant,  ***Chaddanta***,  were  received  the  chief  queen ***Subhaddā*** wept loudly and passed away due to remembrance of benefits and noble qualities of the King elephant ***Chaddanta***. (***Jātaka-A-5-56***) 

**Noticeable  fact  \_\_\_\_\_**  If  the  story  of  ***Cūļasubhaddā***  could  be  seen  again,  it  should  be understood actions are not worth cultivating by surrounding with anger and dissatisfaction. After cultivating any kind of action, it accomplishes its function resulting in difficulty to remove again. If those are ***upapajjavedanīya kamma*** and ***apparāpariya vedanīya kamma***, those can not be removed in the absence of tweezers of the Path of Arahant. After attaining the human’s life in the aspect of ***Subhaddā*** who attained the status of chief queen, it would be better way to avoid killing an elephant dwelling in the forest peacefully. However due to presence of actions surrounded by mind with desire to kill the King elephant ***Chaddanta***, she wa unable to restrain not to kill in that way in the life when that action gives rise to occur resultant  ***dhammas***.  If  any  one  righteous  person  has  also  cultivated  any  kind  of  action through  wrong  means,  he  can  not  only  wail  but  also  enter  into  death.  It  should  be careful.\_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-139** 

**3.7.F  Wishes  of  a  lady  who  was  one  destined  to  be  the  *Pacceka*  *Buddha*  called *Mahāpaduma*** 

A gentleman who was one destined to be the ***Pacceka Buddha*** called ***Mahāpaduma*** had performed ***paradāra kamma*** which is the action of sexual misconduct to other’s wives in one life during fulfilling previous perfections for attainment of enlightenment of ***Pacceka Buddha***. Due to those unwholesome deeds he fell into hell and after escaping from the hell he became woman’s life. In that woman’s life she felt various kinds of suffering, i.e., very hot sensation during conception in the mother’s womb suffering caused by hatred of parents and relatives when she was born, suffering caused by hatred of both mother-in-law, father-in-law and her husband when she was married etc. These kinds of suffering were consequence of sexual  misconduct  actions.  One  day  she  followed  with  her  husband  who  brought  other women to enjoy hill top festival after taking full of food and drink in a coach. After entering into cessation-absorption (***nirodha samāpatti***) throughout seven days one of the ***Pacceka Buddha*** who emerged from cessation-absorption flew in the sky and fell and stood for alms 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE34

food at the place opposite to that woman in order to honour her. That woman with firm faith got off from the coach and brought the ***Pacceka Buddha’s*** bowl and filled with flavoured food and drink. Then she offered the ***Pacceka Buddha*** the bowl under which lotus flowers were placed and prayed four kinds of wishes. Afterwards a bundle of lotus flowers were put on the bowl and prayed again for the fifth wish as follows.\_\_\_\_  

***Pāli Quotation (Suttanipāta-A-1-69)*** 

1. Venerable Sir … as these lotus flowers are worth adoring by all people, may I become the person adored by all people in every life. 
1. Venerable Sir … the conception in the mother’s womb is really great suffering. May I take the conception as ***paţisandhi*** inside lotus flowers but not mother’s wont. 
1. Venerable Sir … every women’s life is very loathsome. Even though one is a princess of the  King  ***Chakavatin***,  she  is  the  one  who  always  follows  other’s  indulgence   called husband’s desire. Therefore may I never reach into woman’s life but into pure manhood. 

**PAGE-140** 

4. Venerable Sir … after overcoming to this suffering of rounds of rebirth may I obtain deathless element called ***nibbanā*** which has been known and seen by Venerable Sir, in final existence. 
4. May my physical scent and complexion be the same as this lotus flower really. 

These wishes were resulted from disgust on every life. In that donation ceremony,\_\_\_ 

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as a man who is worth adoring by all people, who takes his conception inside lotus flower, who can obtain deathless element called ***nibbanā*** in final life, whose physical scent and complexion are the same as lotus flower. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that man’s life. 
1. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment on that man’s life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volition of offering of food and lotus flowers to the ***Pacceka Buddha***. 
1. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition groups. 

Thus  it  was  completed  with  five  kinds  of  causal  ***dhammas***.  Due  to  those  causal ***dhammas*** during catching in human and heavenly existences up and down, he always takes conception inside the lotus flower. In the final existence he became a man, who took his conception inside the lotus flower growing in the lake of royal garden, who is called the prince ***Mahāpaduma***. He had got adoration of all people and possessed physical scent and complexion  as  lotus  flower.  Finally  he  attained  the  enlightenment  of  ***Pacceka  Buddha*** resulting in entering into the deathless element ***dhammas*** called ***nibbāna***.  

These are evidences of the nature i.e, due to presence of wonderful mind, the action (***kamma***) becomes wonderful; due to presence of wonderful action, the forms and shapes of beings become wonderful. These are also evidence of the phenomena in a way that even though terminological usage of ignorance, craving, clinging, formations and action is the same in the principle of dependent-origination, each nature of ignorance, craving, clinging formations and action and respective consequence ***dhammas*** is different from each other according. 

**PAGE-141 4. Section of way of appearance of emblems (*nimitta*)** 
PAGE33

***kamma-kamma  nimitta-gatinimita*  (action-emblem  of  action  performance-emblem  of destinaiton)** 

During scrutinizing  both past causal ***dhammas*** and present causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  formations,  action,  which  will  produce  future  consequence ***dhammas*** for persons with the future coming-into-existence, an important point is any kind of objects called the object of action (***kamma***), the object of emblem of action performance (***kamma nimitta***), the object of emblem of destination (***gatinimitta***) which is the object of impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness.  Therefore  those  kinds  of  objects  are  also essential to be understood clearly for righteous person. 

There are three kinds of objects of ***paţisandhi***, object of action, object of emblem of action performance, object of emblem of destination in brief. 

1. ***kamma  (*action*)***  \_\_\_\_\_  The  term  ***kamma*  (action)**  means  wholesome  volition  and unwholesome volition which has been accomplished indeed. 
1. ***kamma nimitta* (emblem of action performance) \_\_\_\_** 

The action is performed by taking the object of such thing, offering thing etc., and then that thing is called ***kamma nimitta*** (emblem of action performance). 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-148) (Mūlaţī-2-104)*** 

If any kind of actions which may be performed not only in the closet past life but also in the period more far than pico-worlds-period (1012), either the object of action or that of 

emblem of action performance appear at the time adjacent to death-consciousness as come to near (although it does not come really). (***Abhi-A-2-148***) 

1. ***kamma* (action)\_\_\_\_\_** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhidammattha sangaha)*** 

Among enormous kinds of actions whether it had been performed in the first past life or in the period more far than pico-worlds-period (1012), the action which will give rise to 

occur ***paţisandhi*** certainly becomes more apparent than other actions at the time adjacent to death-consciousness. Especially the wholesome volition which will give rise to occur present ***paţisandhi*** of human life was more apparent than other actions at the time adjacent to death- consciousness of past life as popular person is obvious in the crowd. For instance, if one had experienced to offer the building for monastery and wholesome volitions arose spreadingly, by the time adjacent to death-consciousness recollection to that wholesome volition, ability to take the object of that wholesome volition again, appearance of that wholesome volition in the mind-door is called the object of action (***kamma***). This is the way of appearing of object of action through the perception which has been already done (***pubbekatasañña***). 

In  the  way  of  appearing  through  the  perception  that  is  performed  recently (***sampatikatasaññā***), the object of action appears in the mind-door by means of reperforming again wholesome or unwholesome deeds which will give rise to occur resultant ***dhammas*** at the time adjacent to death-consciousness. 

**PAGE-142** 

By the time adjacent to death-consciousness if wholesome volition action of offering of  building  as  monastery  will  give  its  results  really,  newly  wholesome  volitions  arise spreadingly over and over again as donation ceremony of building for monastery is being 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE36

performed recently. If wholesome action of offering of food will give its result really, it appears in the mind-door again as donation ceremony of food is being performed recently again by the time adjacent to death consciousness. If unwholesome action will give rise to occur its resultant ***dhammas*** it appears in the mind-door again as that unwholesome dead is being performed recently and so forth. Most of practising ***meditators*** are observed and found that  the  object  of  action  appears  through  this  perception  that  is  performed  recently (***sampatikatasaññā***). 

2. ***kamma nimitta*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhidhammattha sangaha)*** 

During performing efficacious action the volition which can be said that action arise based  on  various  kinds  of  objects.  The  object  concerning  with  experience  of  action performance is called  ***kamma nimitta*** (emblem of action performance). Those emblems of action performance are really (6) kinds of object, visible-object etc, which can appear in (6) doors accordingly. There are two kinds of emblems, viz., ***upaladdha kamma nimitta and upakaraņa kamma nimitta***. 

The  term,  ***upaladdha  kamma  nimitta***,  means  the  object  of  emblem  of  action performance,  which  concerns  definitely,  which  is  worth  acquiring  directly,  which  is significant one indeed. The term, ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta***, means the object of emblem of action  performance,  which  is  surrounding  things  to  accomplish  the  action,  which  is  non significant one. 

During offering building for monastery, furniture and food, robes etc., are usually offered as surrounding things. By the time adjacent to death-consciousness, if the object of emblem of building appears in the mind-door, that is called ***upaladdha kamma nimitta***. If the object  of  any  kind  of  furniture,  food  and  robe  appears  in  the  mind-door,  that  is  called ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta***. 

By  the  time  adjacent  to  death-consciousness,  if  emblem  of  either  pagoda  or  the Buddha’s statue etc., appears in the mind-door, that is called ***upaladdhakamma nimitta***. If flowers  or  food  or  candle  light  etc.,  appears  in  the  mind-door,  that  is  called ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta***. 

During offering of food and lotus flowers for the ***Pacceka Buddha***, if the object of emblem  of  the  ***Pacceka  Buddha***  appears,  it  is  ***upaladdhakamma  nimitta***.  If  objects  of emblem of food, lotus flowers appear, those are called ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta*** and so forth. 

Furthermore in the aspect of unwholesome action, if objects of emblems of prey, fish, block of meat etc., appear in the mind-door at the time adjacent to death-consciousness, those are called ***upaladdha kamma nimitta***. If objects of weapons etc., appear, those are called ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta***. 

**PAGE-143** 

In the ***Aţţhi Sutta***, ***Lakkhaņa Samyutta*** (***Sam-1-446***) the Buddha preached that a slaughterer reached into the hell after death because he slaughtered enormous cows etc., as livelihood.  After  escaping  from  the  hell,  the  way  of  appearing  of  emblem  of  action performance just before  transferring  into  ghost  realm  is  explained  in  the  commentary  as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-A-1-201)*** 
PAGE35

By the time adjacent to death-consciousness of life in the hell of mass of cow’s bones appeared in the continuum of that denizen of hell. It is called ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta***. As any object appears obviously in the Super-Phychic knowledge of wise persons, such as the most Venerable ***Moggallāna***, that action, which had been performed before falling into hell, which was concealed by one life called denizen of hell, appeared in the continuum of that denizen  of  hell.  Due  to presence  of  remaining  consequences  of  unwholesome  actions  of livelihood as a slaughterer, he became bony ghost in the sky. (***Sam-A-1-201***) 

During occurring as human’s life he made living by selling meat after slaughtering and separating meats and bones. By taking objects of those masses of cows and their bones, unwholesome ***dhammas*** were occurred frequently in the continuum of that slaughterer. Due to presence of heavy unwholesome actions, slaughtering etc, he had reached into hell. Due to remaining  light  unwholesome  actions,  he  reached  into  bony  ghost’s  life.  Just  before transferring to ghost realm, object of emblems of mass of cow’s bone appeared in him. It is called ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta***. If the object of emblem of cows appeared it is called ***upaladdha kamma nimitta***. 

**4.2.A. *Gopaka Sīvali* \_\_\_\_\_** 

A gentleman called ***Sīvali*** who was born as the lineage of custodian of property had built and worshipped a pagoda in the monastery called ***Tāla piţţhika***. While he was lying on the bed by the time adjacent to death-consciousness, the object of pagoda appeared in the continuum of that donor of pagoda, ***Gopaka Sīvali***. He became a heavenly being when he passed  away  by  taking  the  object  of  pagoda.  This  kind  of  appearing  of  object  is  called ***upaladdha kamma nimitta. (Abhi-A-2-148)*** 

**4.2.B White coloured emblem of action performance** 

When the object of impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness was scrutinized over and over a practising ***meditator*** was enable to discern easily. She found the object of white colour only. Although she tried to scrutinize past causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action by penetrating into that white coloured object, it was unable to see easily. It took for three days. Then she kept in mind corporeality-mentality occurring a period a little far from adjacent to death. At that time she found the object of action of offering fruits by a country maid to a *bhikkhu*. 

Then she kept in mind corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** occurring in continuum of both  *bhikkhu*  and  country  maid  alternately.  She  found  that  continuity  of  Corporeality- mentality of country maid and that of corporeality-mentality of herself were continuous ones. At that time continuity of mental ***dhammas*** during offering fruits were kept in mind and past causal ***dhammas*** were scrutinized continuously. Afterwards she saw that due to feeling bitter of country maid’s life, who was poor and illiterate person, she prayed to become educated urbane lady. In this case \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as educated urbane lady. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that woman’s life. 
1. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment to that woman’s life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volition of offering fruits to a *bhikkhu*. 
1. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition groups. 

The group of ignorance, craving, clinging which are defilement rounds occurred in sequence of one time of mind-door adverting consciousness, (7) times of impulsions and (2) times  of  registering  consciousness.  Each  impulsion  consists  of  (20)  mental  ***dhammas*** belonging to  greed-wrong view  group. The  group of formations, action which are action 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE38

rounds also occurred in sequence of one time  of mind-door  adverting  consciousness, (7) times of impulsions and (2) times of registering consciousness. Each impulsion consists of (34)  mental  ***dhammas***  due  to  she  cultivated  wholesome  actions  happily  by  the  help  of reasoning knowledge of firm faith on action and consequence of action. Those mind door cognitive  processes  of  defilement  rounds  and  action  rounds  occur  in  enormous  times. However it is presented one action only through unique method called ***ekattanaya***. Due to accomplishment  of  five  causal  ***dhammas***  called  ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  formations, action, she has got educated urbane lady’s life. However in this case the fact intended to present, actually, is the causal ***dhammas*** called while coloured emblem of action performance only. 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-242)*** 

1. There are causal and resultant ***dhammas*** only in the past period. 
1. There are causal and resultant ***dhammas*** only in the future period. 
1. There are causal and resultant ***dhammas*** only in the present period. 

**PAGE-145** 

In  the  commentary  called  ***Sammohavinodanī***  it  is  instructed  that  the  practising ***meditator*** has to endeavour in order to know only causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are present in all three periods in this way by penetrative experiential knowledge. In accordance with that instruction  the  practising  ***meditator***  continues  to  keep  in  mind  both  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas*** occurring in successive past lives, second past life etc., with the help of penetrative experiential knowledge. 

During keeping in mind in this way by the time adjacent to death-consciousness of the second past life object of white coloured emblems of action performance appeared in the mind-door.  When  corporeality-mentality  occurring  anterior  period  adjacent  to  death- consciousness were kept in mind by sending the knowledge a wholesome action of offering of school building was found. In donation ceremony of that school building both ceiling and inner wall of that school building was covered with white cotton cloth. Due to present of efficiency of that wholesome action of offering of school building, by the time adjacent to death-consciousness of the second past life the object of white coloured emblem of action performance appeared in the mind-door of herself. That kind of object is called ***upakaraņa kamma nimitta***. That object of impulsion adjacent to death-consciousness of the second past life must be taken as objects of ***paţisandhi,*** life-continuum and death-consciousness of the first past life. Therefore objects of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum and death-consciousness of the first past life of that practising ***meditator*** are the same, white-coloured emblem of action performance. This fact should not be forgotten. 

[**Notes:** \_\_\_\_ Objects of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum and death-consciousness of that present life of that practising ***meditator*** are the same as object of action of offering of fruits to a *bhikkhu*, which was taken by impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness of the first past life. This fact should also not to be forgotten. It should be noticed the fact objects of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum and death-consciousness of one life are the same but those are different in different lives respectively.] 

**4.2.C Four kinds of falling of death-consciousness** 

There are four kinds of sessions (***vāra***) relating to falling of death-consciousness, viz., 
PAGE37

1. the  session  at  which  death-consciousness  falls  after  impulsions  adjacent  to  death- consciousness, 
1. the  session  at  which  death-consciousness  falls  after  life-continuum  which  falls  after impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness, 
1. the session at which death-consciousness falls after registering consciousness which falls after impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness, 
1. the  session  at  which  death-consciousness  falls  after  life-continuum  which  falls  after registering  consciousness  falls  after  impulsions  adjacent  to  death-consciousness respectively. That ***meditator*** was a kind of person with death-consciousness falls after enormous times of life-continuum which fall after impulsions. 

**PAGE-146** 

Because those consciousness of ***paţisandhi***, life-continuum and death-consciousness of that present life of that practising ***meditator*** took the object of white coloured emblem of action performance which was the object of impulsion adjacent to death-consciousness, and then death-consciousness fells after enormous times of life-continuum which occurred many hours continuously, when she discerned the period adjacent to death-consciousness she saw white coloured emblems of action performance, which were objects of those life-continuum and death-consciousness of the first past life, for a long time. This kind of person usually has got coma for many hours, many days before death, resulting in arising enormous times of life-continuum. Precise and profound nature of principle of ***Abhidhamma*** of the Supreme Buddha is very wonderful and satisfactory really. 

**4.2.D Indecisive death (*sammuļha kālakiriyā*)** 

***Pali Quotation (Abhi-A-2-148)*** 

` `***(Mūlaţī-2-104)*** 

There is another kind of death, indecisive death, other than death of ***Gapaka Sīvali*** mentioned above. In this case, the commentator said as “indecisive death”, due to lack of worry about remember the object, action etc. At the time adjacent to indecisive death any kind  of  objects,  object  of  action  etc.,  can  appear  without  worry  about  remembrance  the object, object of action etc., indeed. In this case indecisive death called ***sammuļhakālakiriyā*** refers to appearance of objects of emblems, object of action etc., at the time adjacent to death due to presence of efficiency of action only without taking into heart objects, object of action etc. ***Gopaka Sīvali’s*** death also includes in this kind really. In ***Sotānugata Sutta*** the Supreme Buddha preached that all kinds of death of worldling persons are called “indecisive death”. ***Pali Quotation (Ang-1-505) (Ang-A-2-364)*** 

A *bhikkhu* has accomplished to know and see penetratively on the Supreme Buddha’s noble  ***dhammas***  with  (9)  kinds  of  classification  through  both  theoretical  and  practical knowledge. Both mundane mind and mental concomitants, corporeal ***dhammas*** which are called ultimate ***dhammas*** and causal ***dhammas*** of those ultimate ***dhammas*** has been known and  seen  by  penetrative  knowledge.  He  has  also  attained  ***Vipassanā***  Knowledge.  If  that *bhikkhu* passes away before reaching into the Noble Path-Knowledge as worldling person, he becomes heavenly being due to presence of purified virtue. The Supreme Buddha preached that kind of *bhikkhu’s* death is called “death with forgetfulness (***muţţhassatikāla-kiriyā***). In this case, these words, “if that *bhikkhu* passes away without mindfulness”, was not preached 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE40

with referring to forgetfulness on preachings of the Buddha called ***buddhavacana***.  It was preached  with  referring  to  the  death  as  worldling  person.  It  is  right.  \_\_\_\_\_  It  can  be designated the death of worldling person as the death with forgetfulness. (***Ang-1-505; Ang- A-2-364***) 

**PAGE-147** 

In above commentary called ***Sammohavinodani***, actually, it is not explained with referring to the death with forgetfulness but with referring to indecisive death of worldling person who lacks mindfulness which can remember preachings of the Buddha, in the next method, who lacks mindfulness which can remember objects, wholesome volition, action etc. 

It  will  be  explicit.  \_\_\_\_\_  The  person  who  walks  opposite  direction  would  be decapitated with very sharp four-edged dagger behind his back. The person who is falling asleep would also be decapitated with very sharp four-edged dagger during lying. One would be submerged and killed. Even though any kind of death with these circumstance would be occurred,  either  object  of  action  or  object  of  emblem  of  action  performance  can  appear randomly at the time adjacent to death-consciousness really. (***Abhi-A-2-148***) 

**4.2.E. A person who has killed by submerging** 

During  scrutinizing  past  causal  ***dhammas***,  one  ***meditator***  usually  becomes  out  of breath whenever he discerns both corporeality-mentality and objects occurring by the time adjacent to death-consciousness. Then he discerned corporeality-mentality prior to the period adjacent  to  death-consciousness  and  mental  ***dhammas***  of  wholesome  volition  groups  of offering  of  alms-food  to  a  *bhikkhu*  could  be  kept  in  mind.  When  he  discerned  further forwards continuously continuity of mind and mental concomitants occurring during praying could also be kept in mind. His previous wish was that \_\_\_\_\_ “may I become a *bhikkhu* as Venerable Sirs”. \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Ignorance is the nature of wrong knowing as *bhikkhu*. 
1. Craving is the nature of heartfelt desire to that *bhikkhu*’s life. 
1. Clinging is the nature of strong attachment to that *bhikkhu*’s life. 
1. Formations are groups of wholesome volition of offering alms food to a *bhikkhu*. 
1. Action is the efficiency of action of those wholesome volition groups. 

Five  kinds of causal ***dhammas*** were completed.  When he checked over and over whether consequence ***dhammas*** called present life’s five aggregates of ***paţsandhi*** etc., could arisen due to efficiency of that action, he found that causal  relationship occurred really by insight. At that time when he was instructed to keep in  mind corporeality-mentality and object occurring in the period adjacent to death-consciousness again he found a grievous scene as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

PAGE-148 

He became a robber in the first past life. One day he was caught and tourtured with sword-sticks. Then he was put inside gunny bag, brought by a boat and kicked into water. He was submerged and out of breath exceedingly. By the time adjacent to death-consciousness the object of action of offering of alms-food to a *bhikkhu* appeared in mind-door by means of new performance again as mentioned above. That object of action could appear in mind-door without worry and endeavouring to remember it at the time adjacent to death-consciousness. 

At  the  periods  when  it  is  quite  close  to  death  and  impulsions  adjacent  to  death- consciousness he was very tired, resulting in feeling tired during discerning corporeality-
PAGE39

mentality which were occurring at those periods again as recently occurring feeling tired in him. It should be recognized it can be occurred as if joyful object is discerned, one become joyous feeling; as if sorrowful object is discerned, on become sorrowful feeling. 

**Distinctive  phenomenon  \_\_\_\_\_**  The  object  of  action  of  wholesome  volition  of  offering adjacent  to  death-consciousness  was  surrounded  by  ignorance,  craving,  clinging  which obsessed on injuries. Those causal ***dhammas*** are defilement rounds ***dhammas*** which were deposited as underlying tendency element during cultivating actions, which had opportunity to arise just before death again. That practising ***meditator*** has, therefore, got injuries on the head during birth of present life. This is also an evidence which is very accurate principle of ***Abhidhamma***  which  is  profound  and  appears  profound;  which  is  difficult  and  appears difficult. The Supreme Buddha’s ***Abhidhamma*** is full of nobility called ***sandiţţhika guņa*** (the nobility which is worth inviting and observing for all beings). 

In  this  stage  the  righteous  ***meditator***  should  not  forget  the  efficiency  of  light  of 

wisdom. 

**4.2.F Swift death (*lahukamaraņa*)** 

There is another kind of death, swift death, other than indecisive death. A fly rests on top of handle of chisel would be beaten by mallet. Even though very short instant with this kind of circumstance would be an occasion, either object of action or object of emblem of action performance would appear randomly. 

Body-door adverting consciousness can not cease the continuity of life-continuum previously in the continuum of beaten fly in this way. Mind-door adverting consciousness only can cease the continuity of life-continuum. (It means mind-door cognitive process arises beforehand in the continuum of beaten fly.) 

After cessation of life-continuum (7) times of impulsions fall and those are followed by life-continuum. (This is the first mind-door cognitive process.) 

**PAGE-149** 

At  the  second  cognitive  process  five-door  advertising  consciousness  ceases  the continuity of life-continuum. Just after that five-doors adverting consciousness sequence of mind  moments,  i.e.,  touching-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigation consciousness, determining  consciousness  and (7) times of impulsions arise successively. Afterwards  life-continuum  falls  again.  (This  is  the  second  cognitive  process,  body-door cognitive process indeed.) 

At  the  third  cognitive  process  mind-door  adverting  consciousness  ceases  the continuity  of  life-continuum.  Then  (7)  times  of  impulsions  arise  and  it  falls  into  life- continuum. (This is the third, mind-door cognitive process.) 

Death-consciousness  arises  after  life-continuum  which  follows  the  third  cognitive process. This example would be shown in order to be clear understood how object of mental ***dhammas*** can appear so swiftly in this way. (***Abhi-A-2-148***) 

**4.2.G The reason found in *Mūlaţīkā*** 

There is a reasonable question that\_\_\_\_\_ why five-door adverting consciousness is unable  to  cease  continuity  of  life-continuum  beforehand.  Teacher  of  another  school  of thought, the most Venerable ***Dhammasiri Thero*** etc., had an alien concept that\_\_\_\_\_ “it is 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE42

due to presence of any kind of object which is still thinking about of himself called small fly.” 

That is not reasonable fact according to alien concept. This is because\_\_\_\_\_ there is none object which is factor of any thinking other than object of life-continuum and then during thinking on any other object by the mind it is unable to cease continuity of life-continuum really. 

This  factor,  indeed,  may  be  the  source  of  inability  to  cease  continuity  of  life- continuum by five-doors adverting consciousness occurring in body-door cognitive process. 

* ***tānissa tamhi samaye olambanti ajjholambanti abhippalambanti. (M-3-203).*** 

“In the continuum of that being which is quite close to death, those objects called object of action, object of emblem of action performance, object of emblem of destination, appear as dangled thing, hung loosely thing, dangled thing towards one’s attention at the time adjacent to death”, preached by the Buddha. 

Due to presence of preaching by the Supreme Buddha in this way any kind of objects, object of action etc., would be appeared before three sessions of impulsions of cognitive processes shown in the commentary. (It means any kind of objects called object of action, object of emblem of action performance, object of emblem of destination, appears in mind- door beforehand in the continuum of that fly which is certainly to be dead.) 

**PAGE-150** 

It is because \_\_\_\_ among three kinds of objects called object of action, object of emblem of action performance, object of emblem of destination, as dangled thing or dangled thing toward one’s attention any kind of objects would be resulted from occurrence of many sessions  of  impulsions  rather  than  only  once.  Even  though  mere  only  once  session  of impulsions arise it is inappropriate to appear that object either as dangled thing loosely or as dangled  thing  towards  one’s  direction.  At  the period before  reaching  into  three  kinds  of cognitive processes, i.e., mind-door cognitive process, body-door cognitive process, mind- door cognitive process as mentioned above commentary, it is worth appearing any kind of objects among three  kinds of objects which are objects of impulsions adjacent to death- consciousness, resulting in ability to cease the continuity of life-continuum with any kind of objects, object of action etc., by mind-door adverting consciousness but not by five-doors- adverting consciousness within body-door cognitive process in the continuum of beaten fly. 

After  that  first  mind-door  cognitive process,  touching-consciousness  of body-door cognitive process arises in the continuum of beaten fly by taking the present tactile-object due to strong efficiency of tactile-object which is produced by beating. Afterwards impulsions of mind-door cognitive process arise by taking any kind of three object, object of action etc., which has taken by impulsion of mind-door cognitive process previously before that body- door cognitive process. 

Then 

1. the life-continuum which is designated as primary life-continuum or 
1. the life-continuum, which is designated as guest life-continuum (***āgantuka bhavanga***), which is registering consciousness falls continuously. (Registering consciousness arises after impulsions of third mind-door cognitive process.) 
1. If registering consciousness is absent, only once life-continuum arises after impulsions of third mind-door cognitive process. 

If  the  consequence  consciousness  which  is  identical  with  primary  ***paţisandhi*** consciousness arises by performing the function of registering consciousness, that registering 
PAGE41

consciousness  is  called  primary  life-continuum  (***mūlabhavanga***).  If  another  kind  of consequence  consciousness  which  is  not  similar  to  that primary  life-continuum  arises by performing the function of registering consciousness, that registering consciousness is called “guest life-continuum” (***āgantuka bhavanga***) 

***Pali Quotation (Abhi-A-2-148)*** 

***(Mūlaţī-2-104)*** 

The commentary explained that after the third mind-door cognitive process the fly falls to death-consciousness. The essence of explanation of commentary is as follow.\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. If registering consciousness arises after impulsions adjacent to death-consciousness, death consciousness falls after that registering consciousness. 
1. If  registering  consciousness  does  not  arise  after  impulsions  adjacent  to  death- consciousness,  death-consciousness  falls  just  after  impulsions  adjacent  to  death- consciousness. 

This is the explanation how swift death (***lahuka maraņa***) occur in small fly as an example. If the person has got usual way of death but not swift death, there would be four means of death as mentioned above, viz., 

