***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 451 - 500** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN ÑĀ*ṇAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE-451** 

Among those consciousness, receiving and investigating consciousness have unfixed door  and  unfixed  object.  Sometimes  it  arises  by  taking  visible-object  in  the  eye-door. Sometimes it arises by taking audible object in the ear-door and so forth. Thus those kinds of consequence  consciousness  have  unfixed  objects  and  doors  accordingly.  However  those kinds of consequence consciousness always depend on heart-base (***hadaya vatthu***), and those have fixed depended base and lying place (***ṭhaṇā***). Receiving-consciousness has the function of receiving of object while investigating-consciousness has the function of investigating of object. Both have fixed functions respectively. 

Registering-consciousness takes (6) kinds of objects accordingly, resulting in arising in (6) doors accordingly. It has unfixed objects and doors accordingly. It always depends on heart-base. It always performs function of registering. It has fixed depended base and fixed function. 

4. **Noticeable fact on registering-consciousness *Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-179, Abhi-A-2-145)*** 

In  ***Majjhima  Aṭṭhakathā***  (middle  commentary)  it  is  explained  that  just  after receiving-consciousness joyful investigating consciousness, depending on heart-base, arises contiguously both by finishing function of investigating on object which was received by that receiving-consciousness and by taking object which is taken by impulsions (=by means of registering-consciousness), if each object striking in (6) kinds of doors is strong object, that investigating consciousness arises either once or twice by taking that object at the end of impulsions with greed after serving continuity of life-continuum generally in the continuum of  beings  of  sensuous  sphere.  In  ***Abhidhamma***  ***Aṭṭhakathā***  (***Abhi-A-***2-145),  however,  it shows twice mind-moments of registering-consciousness. (Vs-2-179) 

***yebhuyya*** (generally) – After performing function of investigating by joyful investigating- consciousness, the next kind of joyful investigating-consciousness performs the function of registering continuously after end of impulsions with greed again. This is the specification as general (***yebhuyya***). According to this specification, three kinds of registering-consciousness without  root-cause  (***ahetuka  tad-ārammaṇa***)  are  put  down  accordingly  as  priority  after unwholesome impulsions in tables. 

5. **Adverting-consciousness *(āvajjana)* and impulsion *(javana)*** 

If the practicing ***meditator*** who discerns how those consequence consciousness, i.e., fivefold-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness,  registering- consciousness arise due to formation cultivated in previous life, wants to scrutinize and keep in mind up to the field of ultimate nature after breaking down each compactness of mentality called  mental  blocks  occurring  in  both  sides  of  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***,  it  is impossible  to  leave  out  impulsions  occurring  between  investigating  and  registering consciousness.  Furthermore if the process, how consequence consciousness of registering which consists in mind-door cognitive process arise due to formation, is intended to be kept in mind, that kind of registering consciousness is also impossible to arise without arising of impulsions previously. 

Actually, registering consciousness is a kind of consciousness which can arise by taking  object  taken  by  impulsions  successively  after  impulsions.  After  investigating-
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

consciousness  which  arises  previously  before  impulsions  is  discerned,  if  registering- consciousness  is  discerned  after  skipping  impulsions,  each  compactness  of  mentality, compactness of continuity (***santatighana***) could not be broken down, resulting in inability to reach up to the ultimate nature by insight really. 

**PAGE- 452** 

Then If impulsions are also discerned together with consequence consciousness, there is a question that whether those impulsions are also arisen due to previous formation. It is essential to be discerned in order to break down each compactness of those mental ***dhammas*** which are occurring according to fixed law of mind but not relating to formation. During keeping in mind causal relationship, relationship between previous life formations ***dhammas*** and  various  consequence  consciousness  occurring  during  present  life,  i.e.,  fivefold- consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating  consciousness,  registering consciousness  within  five-doors-cognitive  processes  and  only  registering-consciousness within mind-door cognitive process, must be kept in mind. 

Furthermore  those  consequence  consciousness  can  not  arise  in  the  absence  of adverting-consciousness (***āvajjana citta***). According to fixed law of mind, all consciousness of cognitive process, including those consequence consciousness, can not arise, generally, in the absence of adverting consciousness. Therefore during keeping in mind those consequence consciousness,  five-doors-adverting-consciousness,  mind-door-adverting-consciousness  and the  mind-door  adverting-consciousness  which  is  called  determining-consciousness (***vuṭṭhāpana***) must also be kept in mind minglingly for breaking down each compactness and for reaching up to the field of ultimate nature by insight. It is also essential to be understood on the fact those adverting consciousness, determining-consciousness and impulsions also have respective causal ***dhammas*** apparently. However, it should be recognized the fact that because  those  adverting-consciousness  and  impulsions  are  not  arisen  through  previous formations, those consciousness must be excluded during keeping in mind causal relation with previous formations. 

Furthermore, after five-doors-cognitive processes, mind-door cognitive process which follows  successively  five-door-cognitive  processes  (***tadanuvattakamano  dvāra  vīthi***)  and pure mind door cognitive process (***suddha manodvāra vīthi***) can arise in numerous times by separation of life-continuum. If objects of those mind-door-cognitive processes are strong and very  obvious,  registering  consciousness  can  also  arise.  Those  consequence  registering- consciousness  must  also be  kept  in  mind by joining causal  and  resultant ***dhammas***, i.e., relationship between previous formation and those consequence consciousness. 

During keeping in mind in that way, life-continuums also arise accordingly at the intervals  of  those  consciousness  of  cognitive  processes.  Those  are  consequence consciousness which can arise both during ***paṭisandhi*** and during life accordingly. 

6. **Consequence consciousness of *paṭisandhi* and during life *(pavatti)***  These (19) kinds of consequence consciousness, viz., 
1. Neutral  investigating  unwholesome  consequence  without  root-cause  (***ahetuka akusala vipāka upekkhāsantīraṇa***)- ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness of woeful existence, 
PAGE3

2. Neutral investigating  wholesome consequence  without root-cause (***ahetuka kusala*** ***vipāka*** ***upekkhāsantīraṇa***)= ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness without root-cause of joyful existence 
2. Eight  kinds  of  great  consequence  consciousness  =  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  of sensual joyful existence with two roots (***kāmasugati dvihetuka***) and with three roots (***kāmasugati tihetuka***), 
2. Five  kinds  of  consequence  consciousness  of  fine-material  sphere  =  ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness of Fine-material Sphere,  
2. Four  kinds  of  consequence  consciousness  of  Immaterial  Sphere  =  ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness of Immaterial Sphere, 

Arise both during life and during ***paṭisandhi*** accordingly, in woeful realms, sensuous realms, fine-material realms, immaterial realms. If ***paṭisandhi*** of mindless being is added, there  are  (20)  kinds  of  ***paṭisandhi***  (=processes  of **N**ewly **O**ccurrence  of **N**ext **E**xistence, **NONE**) in total. (***Abhi-A-2-148***) 

**PAGE-453** 

1. Neutral investigating unwholesome consequence which is ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness of  woeful  existence  performs  the  function  of  process  of  newly  occurrence  of  next existence  (NONE)  during  ***paṭisandhi***  and  functions  of  life-continuum,  investigating, registering during life and then the function of death at termination in woeful realms. It performs  functions  of  investigating  and  registering  while  undesirable  object  is encountered during life in sensual joyful realms. 

Although  undesirable  object  is  absent  in  fine-material  ***brahma***’s  world,  those ***brahma***s can encounter undesirable objects sometimes while they are visiting sensual realms, human world etc, temporarily. Therefore that neutral investigating unwholesome consequence  performs  the  function  of  investigating  by  the  time  undesirable  object  is encountered while fine-material ***brahma***s is visiting to sensual realms called during life (***pavatti***). 

2. Neutral investigating wholesome consequence performs the function of process of newly occurrence of next existence (NONE) during ***paṭisandhi***; it performs functions of life-continuum, investigating, registering during life; and function of death at termination in the continuum of congenital blind person (***jaccandha***) etc, in sensual joyful realms. It performs  functions  of  investigating,  registering  by  the  time  desirable-objects  is encountered during life in the continuum of remaining sensuous beings with two roots, three  roots.  If  performs  the  function  of  investigating  by  the  time  desirable  object  is encountered in the fine-material spheres. 
2. Among (8) kinds of great consequence consciousness, (4) kinds of great consequence consciousness with two roots but not knowledge (***ñāṇa vipayutta dvihetuka mahā vipāka viññāṇa***) perform the function of process of NONE during life; those perform functions of  life-continuum,  registering  during  life;  those  perform  the  function  of  death  in  the continuums  of  persons  with  two  roots  in  sensual  joyful  realms.  Those  (4)  kinds  of consequence consciousness perform function of registering by the time desirable-object is encountered during life in the continuums of persons with two roots and three roots in sensual joyful realms accordingly. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE6

Four kinds of great consequence consciousness with three roots associating with knowledge (***ñāṇa*** ***sampayutta tihetuka mahāvipāka*** ***viññāṇa***) perform the function of process of NONE during life; those perform the function of life-continuum; those perform the function of death at termination in the continuums of persons with three roots in sensual joyful realms, accordingly. Those also perform the function of registering by the time desirable-object is encountered during life, accordingly. 

4. Five kinds of consequence consciousness of Fine-material Sphere perform functions of process of NONE, life-continuum, death in respective realms, the First Absorption Realm etc. 
4. Four kinds of consequence consciousness of Immaterial Sphere also perform functions of process of NONE, life-continuum, death in respective realms. 
7. **Nature of presence of acquired efficiency *(atthibhāva)*** 

***tatrassa te te saṅkhāra kammapaccayena ca paccayā honti. (Abhi-A-2-146) paṭisandhiyam  nānākkhaṇika  kammapaccayena  ceva  upanissaya  paccayena  cāti dvidhā paccayo. (Abhi-A-2-158)*** 

**PAGE- 454** 

According to explanations found in above commentaries, formations and actions which were cultivated in previous lives benefit for arising of various consequence consciousness of both during ***paṭisandhi*** and during life by means of efficiency of relations of asynchronous action (***nānākkhaṇika kamma paccaya***) and determinative dependence (***upanissaya paccaya***). 

While formation is arising due to ignorance and while consciousness is arising due to formation, the nature of apparent presence of acquired efficiency of ignorance and formation is  called  ***atthibhāva***.  Those  ignorance  and  formation  are  separated  by  numerous  mind- moments, numerous continuities of cognitive processes, generally. Sometimes ignorance and unwholesome formation usually arise within the same mind-moment and the same continuity of  consciousness  of  cognitive  process  simultaneously.  That  ignorance,  however,  can  be separated with wholesome formation which produce wholesome consequence consciousness, consequence consciousness of ***paṭisandhi*** of present human’s existence etc., by numerous cognitive processes. 

Similarly  during  arising  of  various  consequence  consciousness  due  to  formations, those formations and consequence consciousness arose in different lives separately. Thus, when  resultant  ***dhammas***  arise  apparently  within  three-time-phases  called  ***uppāda-ṭhiti- bhanga***, causal ***dhammas*** are absent within three-time-phases, ***uppāda-ṭhiti-bhanga*** really. Because resultant consequence round ***dhammas*** can be arisen when ignorance and formation were absent within three-time-phases, uppāda***-ṭhiti-bhanga***, the phrase, “due to arising of ignorance, formation, respective consequence round ***dhammas*** arise”, means only the nature of presence of acquired efficiency (=action potentiality) of ignorance and formation, which can give rise to occur respective resultant ***dhammas***. 

Those  formation  volition  surrounded  by  ignorance,  craving,  clinging  never  perish away without embedding any kind of efficiency when they perish away after coming up to specified time as consequence volition. They usually perish away after embedding efficiency of action (***kamma***) (=action potentiality), which can give rise to occur various coming-into-
PAGE5

existences,  human  existence,  heavenly  existence,  ***brahma***  existence  etc,  when  it  become matured  in  future,  within  continuities  of  corporeality-mentality.  By  scrutinizing  that efficiency  of  action  (***kamma***)  (=action  potentiality),  which  is  apparently  present  in continuities of corporeality-mentality generally, if deserving consequence is not given rise to occur, and then by seeing how various consequence consciousness, ***paṭisandhi*** consequence consciousness etc., arise due to that efficiency of action, the righteous ***meditator*** must keep in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** as follow:- 

**Examples of keeping in mind causal and resultant dhammas-** 

1. Due to arising of formation, ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness arises. Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of formation, life-continuum-consciousness arises. Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; life-continuum-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of formation, death-consciousness arises. Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; death-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-455** 

8. **Way of Keeping in mind causes and results on the whole** 
1. Due  to  arising  of  formation,  seeing-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness arise. Formation  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***;  seeing-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness, are the resultant ***dhammas***. (eye - door-cognitive process) 
1. Due  to  arising  of  formation,  hearing-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness arise. Formation  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***;  hearing-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness, are the resultant ***dhammas***. (ear - door-cognitive process) 
1. Due  to  arising  of  formation,  smelling-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness arise. Formation  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***;  smelling-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness, are the resultant ***dhammas***. (nose-door-cognitive process) 
1. Due  to  arising  of  formation,  tasting-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness arise. 

Formation  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***;  tasting-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness, are the resultant ***dhammas***. (tongue-door-cognitive process) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE8

5. Due  to  arising  of  formation,  touching-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness arise. 

Formation  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***;  touching-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness, investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness,  which  are  consequence consciousness, are the resultant ***dhammas***. (body-door-cognitive process) 

6. Due to arising of formation, registering-consequence consciousness arises. 

Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; registering-consequence consciousness, is the resultant ***dhammas***. (mind-door-cognitive process) 

This way of discerning is for very sharp wisdom virtuous persons only. Those persons can discern how those all kinds of consequence consciousness called seeing-consciousness, receiving-consciousness,  investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness  which consist in each continuity of cognitive process, eye-door-cognitive process etc, arise due to previous formation on the whole. Those persons with retarded knowledge, however, cannot discern in that way on the whole. If it is so, it can be discerned one after another separately. In most practicing ***meditator***s, if each ***dhamma*** is discerned specifically, it can be found the knowledge become more and more clear generally. 

Furthermore,  above  mentioned  consequence  consciousness  are  only  wholesome consequence consciousness which are arising by taking (6) kinds of desirable and moderate desirable objects accordingly through previous wholesome formation. Those unwholesome consequence  consciousness,  which  are  arising  by  taking  (6)  kinds  of  undesirable  and moderate  undesirable  objects  accordingly  through  unwholesome  formation  cultivated  in previous life, must be discerned again when unwholesome formations can be kept in mind systematically. In this stage the way of discerning on wholesome consequence consciousness which are arisen due to wholesome formations cultivated in previous lives, is presented as priority. The righteous ***meditator*** who is mastery in discerning on fifth method of dependent- origination could finished to discern how various unwholesome consequence consciousness arise due to unwholesome formation cultivated in previous lives. If he can discern in that way,  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  together  with  those  unwholesome  consequence consciousness must be kept in mind by seeing how those ***dhammas*** occurring during life (***pavatti***) arise due to those unwholesome formations. 

**PAGE-456** 

***Impulsions (javana)*** – Although those consequence consciousness can be varied depending on  kinds  of  objects,  i.e.,  wholesome  consequence  consciousness  arises  through  taking desirable  or  moderate  desirable  objects;  unwholesome  consequence  consciousness  arises through taking undesirable or moderate undesirable objects, the impulsion, actually, is not varied depending on  kinds of objects, desirable or undesirable ones but it can be varied depending on attention (***manasikāra***), i.e., the wholesome impulsion arises through wise- attention (***yoniso-manasikāra***); the unwholesome impulsion arises through unwise-attention (***ayoniso-manasikāra***)  accordingly.  Therefore,  all  kinds  of  consequence  consciousness consisting  in  five-doors-cognitive  processes,  mind-door-cognitive  processes  with  both wholesome and unwholesome impulsions must be discerned thoroughly row by row as shown in tables of ***nāmakammatṭhaṇā***, Volume II. 

**Registering-consciousness *(tadārammaṇa)*\_\_\_*** 
PAGE7

All  kinds  of  registering-consciousness  consisting  in  five-doors-cognitive processes and mind-door-cognitive processes, mind-door-cognitive processes that always follows five- doors-cognitive processes etc, must be discerned on the whole. 

**Adverting-determining-impulsions** 

In  the  stage  of  discerning  on  how  consciousness  arises  due  to  formation,  those consciousness, both five-doors-adverting, determining, impulsions consisting in five-doors- cognitive processes and mind-door-adverting, impulsions consisting in mind-door-cognitive process,  are  left  over  during  keeping  in  mind  causal  relationship  because  those  are  not consequence consciousness produced by formation. However, during performing ***vipassanā*** practice,  if  those  consciousness  are  discerned  as  objects  of  ***vipassanā***  practice  with  the intention not to remain any kind of ultimate element, it could not be disadvantages anymore. It should be understood various consequence consciousness, seeing-consciousness etc, cannot arise in the absence of five-doors-adverting consciousness; registering-consciousness cannot fall in the absence of impulsion; consciousness of mind-door-cognitive process can not arise in the absence of mind-door-adverting-consciousness, as mentioned previously. 

9. **Way of keeping in mind causes and results specifically in next method** 
1. Due to arising of formation, seeing-consciousness arises.  

`    `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; seeing-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due to arising of formation, receiving-consciousness arises.  

`    `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; receiving-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***. 

3. Due to arising of formation, investigating-consciousness arises.  

`    `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; investigating-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***. 

4. Due to arising of formation, registering-consciousness arises.  

`    `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***; registering-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Notes**:  In five-doors-cognitive process, registering-consciousness has to be discerned twice separately.  In  mind-door-cognitive  process,  it  has  also  to  be  discerned  twice  separately, resulting  in  (4)  times  in  total.  Numerous  registering-  consciousness  can  be  discerned continuously in numerous mind-door-cognitive processes. As mentioned above, (5) times of mind-moments,  i.e.,  seeing-consciousness,  receiving-consciousness,  investigating- consciousness, first registering and second registering-consciousness consisting in one eye- door-cognitive  process  and  (2)  times  of  mind-moments,  i.e.,  first  registering  and  second registering-consciousness consisting in mind-door-cognitive processes, mind-door-cognitive process which follows five-doors-cognitive processes etc, (7)times of mind-moments in total have to be discerned specifically. Please see again on tables of ***nāmakammatṭhāṇa***, Volume II. Seven times for each row must be discerned specifically. Causal relationship of every row must be kept in mind thoroughly. Both wholesome and unwholesome groups must be kept in mind thoroughly. Remaining cognitive process, ear-door-cognitive process etc., must also be discerned similarly. Ways of discerning on those consequence consciousness, i.e., receiving, investigating,  registering  consciousness  of  all  (6)  lines  (door)  are  the  same.  It  will  be presented on a few differences among remaining doors as follows. 

**PAGE-457** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE10

1. In ear-door-cognitive process - 

`      `Due to arising of formation, hearing-consciousness arises.  

`      `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***, hearing-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***.  

2. In nose-door-cognitive process - 

`      `Due to arising of formation, smelling-consciousness arises.  

`      `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***, smelling-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***.  

3. In tongue-door-cognitive process - 

`      `Due to arising of formation, tasting-consciousness arises.  

`      `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***, tasting-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***.  

4. In body-door-cognitive process - 

`      `Due to arising of formation, touching-consciousness arises.  

`      `Formation is the causal ***dhamma***, touching-consciousness is the resultant ***dhamma***.  

5. In mind-door-cognitive process - 

`      `Due to arising of formation, the first registering-consciousness arises.  

`      `Formation  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***,  the  first  registering-consciousness  is  the  resultant ***dhamma***.  

It  should  be  understood  in  this  way.  All  kinds  of  consequence  consciousness consisting in each row and each cognitive process as shown in tables of ***nāmakammatṭhāṇa*** Volume II, thoroughly. 

10. ***nānākkhaṇika kamma paccaya*, (efficiency of relation of asynchronous action) and *upanissaya paccaya* (efficiency of relation of determinative dependence)** 

***Pāli Quotation (Paṭṭhāna-1-7) (Paṭṭhāna-1-147) (Paṭṭhāna-1-150)*** 

According to these preachings found in ***Paṭṭhāna*** (conditional Relations), wholesome and  unwholesome  actions  (***kamma***)  benefit  for  arising  of  consequence  consciousness  by means of efficiency of relations of asynchronous action and determinative dependence. 

***nānāakkhaṇikakammapaccaya*** – Those wholesome formations (unwholesome formations) actions and various consequence consciousness, during ***paṭisandhi*** and during life of present existence are separated by numerous mind-moments, cognitive processes. It can be separated by even worlds time. Because causal and resultant ***dhammas*** have different arising phases, that  causal  ***dhamma***  is  designated  as  ***nānāakkhaṇikakammapaccaya***  ***dhamma***  (=  the ***dhamma*** which benefits by the relation of asynchronous action), while resultant ***dhamma*** is designated  as  ***nānāakkhaṇikakammapaccayuppanna***  ***dhamma***  (=  the  ***dhamma***  which  is benefited by the relation of asynchronous action), respectively. 

***upanissaya  paccaya***  –  Obvious  occurrence  of  various  consequence  consciousness  during ***paṭisandhi***  and  during  life  is  accomplished  due  to  determinative  dependence  of  those wholesome formations or unwholesome formations really. Those formations are arising of various consequence consciousness through natural determinative dependence indeed. Unless those formations are depended or unless those formations, actions had not been done, there will  be  no  opportunity  to  arise  various  consequence  consciousness  apparently.  It  can, 
PAGE9

therefore, be said formation benefits for arising of consequence consciousness by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence. It should be recognized the fact in this concern of relation of determinative dependence causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are separated by numerous mind-moments, cognitive processes or even numerous worlds periods really. 

**PAGE- 458** 

11. **Only the factor which had been done is the pith  *Pāli Quotation* (*Abhi-A-2-156, Vs-2-189*)** 

Only when the factor had been done, formation ***dhammas*** can occur causal ***dhammas*** of their resultant ***dhammas***. Due to occurrence of either apparent presence or absence, those causal  ***dhammas***  of  their  resultant  ***dhammas***  never  arise  really.  In  the  ***Pāli  Text***  of ***Dhammasangani  (Abhi-1-104)***,  The  Supreme  Buddha,  himself,  preached  these  kinds  of preaching, “due to only occurrence of accomplishment to be done and cultivated sensual wholesome action (***kamma***), the consequence seeing-consciousness arises within three-time- phases called ***uppāda-ṭhiti-bhanga***”, etc. (***Abhi-A-2-156, Vs-2-189***) 

It  should,  therefore,  be  recognized  the  fact  during  arising  of  consequence consciousness  through  this  formation,  only  the  accomplishment  of  cultivating  formation, action is the pith. Especially for righteous ***meditator*** who is mankind, that formation might be any kind of (8) kinds of great wholesome consciousness of sensuous sphere. In this work, the first kind of great wholesome consciousness, joyful with knowledge, unprepared (***somanassa sahagata ñāṇa sampayutta asaṅkhārika***) is presented as example. In that kind of formation, (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** led by volition (***cetanā***) arise within one mind moment. It is continuity of impulsions of mind-door-cognitive process indeed. 

**PAGE-459** 

**2.6 *viññāṇapaccaya nāmarūpam* due to arising of consciousness, mind-matter arise** 

1. **The basic meaning of the term, consciousness (*viññāṇa*)** 

***nāmarūpassa yam hetu, viññāṇam tam dvidhā matam. vipākamavipākañca, yuttameva yato idam.*** (***Abhi-A-2-163, Vs-2-194***) 

***viññāṇa* (consciousness)-** There are two kinds of consciousness which are origin of mind- matter, namely, ***vipāka*** ***viññāṇa*** (consequence consciousness) and ***avipāka*** ***viññāṇa*** (non- consequence  consciousness).  Among  those,  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness,  life-continuum- consciousness,  death-consciousness  are  consequence  consciousness  which  are  free  from cognitive  process  (***vīthimutta  citta***),  while  five-doors-consciousness,  receiving- consciousness,  investigating-consciousness,  registering-consciousness  are  consequence consciousness  lying  in  the  continuity  of  consciousness  of  cognitive  process  (***vīthicitta***). Wholesome  consciousness,  unwholesome  consciousness,  indifferent  consciousness  (***kiriyā*** ***viññāṇa***) are non-consequence consciousness. 

Among  those  non-consequence  consciousness,  wholesome  and  unwholesome consciousness  are  designated  as  both  ***abhisaṅkhāra***  ***viññāṇa***  (super-formation consciousness)  and  ***kamma***  ***viññāṇa***  (action  potential  consciousness).  (***Abhi-A-2-163, Mūlaṭī-2-115***) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE12

Those  super  formation  consciousness  (=  action  potential  consciousness)  are  also varied as two kinds, i.e., super-formation consciousness cultivated in past period and super formation  consciousness  cultivating  in  present  period.  If  the  righteous  person  has  got potential  future  coming-into-existences  definitely,  there  would  be  super-formation consciousness that could be cultivated in 

 future also in him. 

***Pāli Quotation*** (***Cūļani-A-24***) 

Those action potential consciousness (***kamma*** ***viññāṇa***) which are associating with (13) kinds of wholesome volitions called wholesome formations, VIZ., (8) kinds of great wholesome volitions, (5) kinds of fine-material wholesome volitions, are designated as the wholesome  formation  consciousness  (***puññābhisaṅkhāra***  ***viññāṇa***);  while  those  action potential  consciousness  which  are  associating  with  (12)  kinds  of  unwholesome  volitions called unwholesome formations, are designated as the unwholesome formation consciousness (a-***puññābhisaṅkhāra*** ***viññāṇa***); those action potential consciousness which are associating with   (4)  kinds  of  immaterial  wholesome  volitions  called  unshakable  formations,  are designated  as  the  unshakable  formation  consciousness  (***ānenjābhisaṅkhāra***  ***viññāṇa***). (***Cūļani-A***-***24***) 

Those action potential consciousness (***kammaviññāṇa***) are capable of organizing to give rise to occur both various kinds of ***paṭisandhi***, i.e. processes of newly occurrence of next existence as human, ***deva*** etc., and various kinds of consequences, i.e., comely personality and appearance, non-comely personality and appearance; superior lineage, inferior lineage etc.;  in  every  coming-into-existence  that  would  be  acquired  (=  to  give  rise  to  occur consequence  consciousness  together  with  corporealities  produced  by  ***kamma***  called ***kammajarūpa***).  That  action  potential  consciousness  is,  therefore,  also  designated  as ***abhisaṅkhāraviññāṇa***  (=  super-formation  consciousness).  (***Cūļani-A-167,  Abhi-A-1-107, Abhi-A-2-134, Ang-A-2-204, Ang-ṭī-2-183***) 

**PAGE-460** 

In  the  next  method,  those  consequence  consciousness  and  non-consequence consciousness  are  also  known  as  action  potential  consciousness  (***kamma***  ***viññāṇa***), compatible  consciousness  (***sahajāta  viññāṇa***), post-compatible  consciousness  (***pacchājāta*** ***viññāṇa***). (***Mūlaṭī-2-115***) 

Those  wholesome  formation  consciousness,  unwholesome  formation  consciousness, unshakable formation consciousness which had been cultivated in previous lives of rounds of rebirth are designated as action potential consciousness (***kamma*** ***viññāṇa***). Those mental concomitants which are occurring throughout life from the beginning of ***paṭisandhi*** and those wholesome  consciousness,  unwholesome  consciousness,  consequence  consciousness, indifferent consciousness, which can produce ***cittajarūpa*** (= corporeality produced by mind), which arise together with resultant mind-matter simultaneously, are designated as compatible consciousness (***sahajāta viññāa***). Two-fivefold-consciousness are compatible consciousness which  can  produce  only  mental  concomitants  but  not  ***cittajarūpa***.  Every  succeeding consciousness which is capable of supporting to maintain corporeal ***dhammas*** which arise together with preceding consciousness simultaneously until end of life span (=which can 
PAGE11

benefit those corporeal ***dhammas*** by means of efficiency of relation of post-compatibility) is designated as post-compatible consciousness (***pacchājāta*** ***viññāṇa***). 

Among  these  three  kinds,  i.e.,  action  potential  consciousness,  compatible consciousness, post-compatible consciousness, the action potential and post-compatible ones are  also  designated  as  incompatible  consciousness  (***a-sahajāta***  ***viññāṇa***).  It  means  the consciousness which never arises together with resultant mind-matter simultaneously. ***(Anuṭī- 2-128)*** 

In  this  case,  the  group  of  compatible  consciousness,  which  can  produce  resultant mind-matter, includes various indifferent consciousness also. In the continuum of righteous ***meditator*** who is still a worldling person possible indifferent consciousness are five-doors- adverting and mind-door-adverting consciousness which perform functions of adverting and determining. Mind-door-adverting consciousness performs both function of determining in five-doors-cognitive  process  and  function  of  adverting  in  mind-door-cognitive  process respectively. 

Furthermore  that  group  of  compatible  consciousness  includes  ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness  also.  That  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  benefits  for  simultaneous  arising  of mental concomitants together with itself by means of efficiency of relation of compatibility (***sahajātapaccaya***) etc. Although that ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness can not produce ***cittajarūpa***, it benefits for simultaneous arising of ***kammajarūpa*** (= corporeality produced by action) together  with  itself  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of  compatibility  etc.  It  should, therefore,  be  recognized  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  can  also  produce  mind-matter  in periphrasis method (***pariyāya naya***) It will be continued to present the basic meaning of resultant mind-matter as follows. 

2. **The basic meaning of the term, *rūpa*m (matter)** 

***tattha  katamam  rūpam,  cattāro  ca  mahābhūtā  catunnañca  mahābhūtānam  upādāya rūpam. idam vaccati rūpam. (Abhi-2-142, 143, Sam-1-245, M-1-65, 66)*** 

In above ***Pāli Texts*** of ***Abhidhamma*** and ***Suttanta***, with regarding to the term, corporeal ***dhamma***  consisting  in  the  word,  ***nāmarūpam***,  it  is  preached  consistently  without  any variation to infer on  

un-derived corporealities (***bhūta rūpa***) and derived corporealities (***upāda rūpa***) as the basic meaning. (***Abhi-A-2-160***) 

**PAGE-461** 

3. **The basic meaning of the term, *nāma* (mind) *Pāli Quotation (Sam-1-245, M-1-65, 66) (Abhi-2-143)*** 

In  the  ***Pāali  Text***  of  ***Suttanta***,  “the  term,  ***nāma***  (mind),  consisting  in  the  phrase ***viññāṇapaccayā*** ***nāmarūpam*** (= due to arising of consciousness, mind-matter arise), must be inferred feeling, perception, volition, contact, intention as basic meaning”, preached by the Supreme  Buddha.  In  this  ***Pāli  Text***  of  ***Abhidhamma***  ***Vibhanga***,  the  Supreme  Buddha instructed to infer feeling-aggregate, perception aggregate, formation-aggregate as the basic meaning relating to the term, ***nāma*** (mind). 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE14

In these phrases, ***citassa ṭhiti*** (= factor of existing of consciousness), and ***arūpīnam*** ***dhammānamāyu***  (=vital  controlling  faculty  of  mental  ***dhamma***),  the  phrase,  “the  vital controlling faculty of mental ***dhamma*** which is factor of existing of consciousness”, can be apparent  only  when  the  preaching  is  performed  depending  on  other  ***dhamma***  called consciousness. It says the phrase, “factor of existing”, “factor of existing”. There is a question that is it factor of existing of which ***dhamma***?” It would be apparent only when the preaching is performed that “factor of existing of consciousness”. Similarly, in the phrase, “the vital controlling faculty of mental ***dhamma***”, the word, ***āyu*** (= vital controlling faculty), can be apparent only when the preaching is performed depending on other mental ***dhammas*** called ***arūpī***. There is a question which ***dhamma***’s vital controlling faculty. If it is answered “vital controlling faculty of mental ***dhammas***”, it would be completed. Only when other mental ***dhammas***, out of vital controlling faculty, is preached as dependence, it can be apparent really.  In  this  case,  the  term,  dependence  (=  depending  on),  means  the  preaching methodology which is performed by relating to other ***dhammas***. 

Because  those  mental  ***dhammas***  (i.e.,  mental  concomitants)  produced  by  seeing- consciousness can be kept in mind by insight without depending on other ***dhamma*** in this way, those are apparent through feeling, perception, volition, contact, intention. With the intention to show those apparent ***dhammas***, formation aggregate is preached by dividing three kinds, i.e., volition, contact, intention, together with two kinds of aggregates called feeling and perception in the ***Pāli Text*** of ***Suttanta***. [Contact, volition, intention are obvious in formation aggregate. Those formation aggregate ***dhammas*** are preached collectively in those  three  kinds  through  preaching  methodologies  called  significant  method  (***padhāna naya***), obvious method (***pākaṭanaya***). If all are added together, there would also be three kinds of aggregates only, viz., feeling-aggregate, perception aggregate, formation aggregate.] 

In  this  ***Pāli  Text***  of  ***Abhidhamma***  ***Vibhanga***,  however,  three  kinds  of  mental aggregates called feeling-aggregate, perception-aggregate, formation-aggregate, are preached as mental ***dhammas*** due to occurrence of desire to gather up all kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of both  those  ***dhammas***  which  has  been  preached  in  the  ***Pāli  Text***  of  ***Suttanta***  and  those ***dhammas*** which has not been preached anymore. (***Abhi-A-***2***-160***) 

In this way of inferring basic meaning, the causality, consciousness and the result, mental  concomitant  ***dhammas***  called  feeling-aggregate,  perception-aggregate,  formation aggregate, are compatible ***dhammas*** which are occurring together within one mind-moment simultaneously. It includes all kinds of consciousness of both cognitive process and free from cognitive  process  occurring  throughout  life  from  ***paṭisandhi***  until  death.  By  seeing  how compatible mind-matter arise due to compatible consciousness with the help of penetrative insight knowledge, causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind thoroughly.  

**PAGE- 462** 

**The fact to be questioned** \_\_\_\_ Can only three kinds of aggregates called feeling-aggregate, perception-aggregate,  formation-aggregate  be  designated  as  mind  (***nāma***)  but  not  the consciousness?  This  is  the  question  indeed.- **The  answer**-  All  consciousness  and  mental concomitant ***dhammas*** have got availability to designation as mind (***nāma***) due to presence of nature of inclination towards object. The consciousness is not, therefore, in-availability to designation  as  mind  but  available  one  indeed.  Although  consciousness  is  also  mental ***dhamma*** in that way, if that consciousness is inferred as the term, ***nāma***, with referring to ***nāmarūpa***,  it  will  be  reached  into  the  fault  called  simultaneous  arising  of  two  kinds  of 
PAGE13

consciousness, i.e., resultant consciousness including in the term, ***nāma***, (=***nāmaviññāṇa***) and  causal  consciousness  which  is  inclusive  in  the  phrase,  ***viññāṇa***  ***paccaya***.  It  should, therefore,  be  recognized  only  three  kinds  of  mental  aggregates  called  feeling-aggregate, perception-aggregate, formation-aggregate are worth preaching as mind (***nāma***) in order to instruct and to show mental concomitants called ***nāma*** which arise due to causality called consciousness after the consciousness is put in the place of causal ***dhamma***. 

4. **Way of discerning on *paṭisandhi* moment** 

If the righteous ***meditator*** might be a person who has got ***paṭisandhi*** with the first great  consequence,  joyful  with  knowledge,  unprepared  (***somanassa  sahagata ñāṇasampayutta asaṅkhārika***), there would be (34) mental ***dhammas*** and (30) corporealities produced by ***kamma***, CPK, (***kammajarūpa***) at the moment of ***paṭisandhi***. After ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness consisting in (34) mental ***dhammas*** of ***paṭisandhi*** is put in the place of causal ***dhamma***,  by  seeing  how  (33)  mental  concomitants  and  (30)  corporealities  produced  by ***kamma*** CPK, arise due to that ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness causal relationship must be kept in mind as follows\_\_\_\_ 

Due to arising of ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness, ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter arise. ***Paṭisandhi*** consciousness is the causal ***dhamma***; ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter are resultant ***dhamma***. 

At the static phase (***ṭhiti***) of ***paṭisandhi***, corporealities produced by temperature, CPT, (***utujarūpa***) begin to arise but not corporealities produced by mind, CPM, (***cittajarūpa***) and corporealities produced by nutriment, CPN, (***āhārajarūpa***). Therefore, if one wants to discern those CPT also minglingly, it is possible. If the righteous ***meditator*** had deficiency of sex- corporealities (***bhāvarūpa***) in any one of previous lives, there were only (20) kinds of CPK but not (30) kinds in that previous life. 

If the righteous ***meditator*** had got an experience as spontaneous-born heavenly being (***opapātika deva***) with complete controlling faculties in any one kind of previous lives, there were (34) mental ***dhammas*** and (70) kinds of corporealities at the moment of ***paṭisandhi*** of that previous life. There were (7) kinds of decades of corporeal units (***dasaka kalāpa***) called eye-decad,  ear-decad,  nose-decad,  tongue-decad, body-decad,  sex-decad  and base-decad  ( heart-decad,  ***hadayadasaka***),  resulting  in  (70)  kinds  of  corporealities  in  total.  Causal relationship must be kept in mind by seeing how (33) kinds of ***paṭisandhi*** mental ***dhammas*** and (70) kinds of corporealities arise due to ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness systematically.  

**PAGE-463** 

If the righteous ***meditator*** had got an experience as spontaneous-born ***brahma***’s life in any  one  kind  of  previous  lives,  there  were  (34)  mental  ***dhammas***  and  (39)  kinds  of corporealitise at the first absorption consequence ***paṭisandhi*** moment of that previous life. There are (30) kinds of deacds, i.e., eye-decads, ear-decads, base-decads and one kind of nonad called vital nonads (***jīvitanavaka***). [In the absorption of compassion (***karunā jhāna***), the mental concomitant called compassion (***karuṇā***) must be added. In the absorption of sympathetic joy (***mudita jhāna***), the mental concomitant called sympathetic joy (***muditā***) must  be  added.  If  it  is  the  second  absorption  consequence  ***paṭisandhi***,  it  lacks  initial application  (***vitakka***)  and  sustained  application  (***vicāra***).  If  it  is  the  third  absorption consequence ***paṭisandhi***, it lacks pleasurable interest (***pīti***). 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE15

It should be understood in this way etc.] Causal relationship must be kept in mind by seeing  each  kind  of  ***paṭisandhi***  mind-matter  due  to  those  respective  ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness. Causal relationship must be kept in mind by seeing each kind of ***paṭisandhi*** mind-matter due to those respective ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness. 

Causal relationship must be kept in mind by seeing how various kinds of mind-matter arose accordingly, due to respective various kinds of ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness in various previous lives. It should be understood similarly on future periods. 

Only  three  kinds  of  mental  aggregates  arise,  due  to  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  in Immaterial Sphere. In the continuum of mindless beings, actually, only corporeal ***paṭisandhi*** called  vital  nonads  (***jīvitanavaka***  ***kalāpa***)  arise,  due  to  super-formation  consciousness (=action  potential  consciousness)  which  had  been  cultivated  in   the  life  adjacent  before mindless realm. 

All kinds of corporealities produced by four origins (***catusamuṭṭhānika rūpa***) called CPK (***kammajarūpa***), CPM (***cittajarūpa***), CPT (***utujarūpa***), CPN (***āhārajarūpa***) can be discerned on  the  whole  at  the  beginning  of  arising  of  those  corporealities  during  life.  Corporeal ***dhammas*** which can arise due to compatible consciousness are only CPM (***cittajarūpa***) in accordance  with  the  preaching,  ***“cittacetasikā  dhammā  cittasamutṭhaṇānam  rūpānam sahajāta paccayena paccayo,” (Paṭṭhāna-1-5)*** 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Abhi-A-2-162, Vs-2-194)*** 

Among  these  corporealities  produced  by  four  origins,  although  corporealities produced by ***kamma*** (CPK) exist the earliest in all kinds of corporealities of all coming-into- existences,  conceptions  (***yoni***),  existences  (***gati***),  lying  places  of  consciousness  (***viññāṇa*** ***ṭṭhiti***), realms of beings (***sattavasa***), it is unable to exist in the absence of supporting factor of corporealities produced by three origins (***tisamuṭṭhānika rūpa***) called CPM, CPT, CPN and vice versa. Actually as four bundles of reeds, which are upright standing by tying on the top and spreading out at the base, cannot fall down, even though they are blown by strong wind; as those boats which are lying at a harbour by attaching together with each other cannot be separated by beating of waves and wind, because of presence of supporting to each other---- similarly,  CPK  (***kammajarūpa***)  and  corporealities  produced  by  three  origins  are  existing within the same body throughout life by depending on each other. (***Abhi-A-2-162, Vs-2-194)*** 

With  regarding  to  the  words,  corporeal  ***dhamma***  which  arises  due  to  compatible consciousness, it should, therefore, be inferred not only corporealities produced by mind, CPM, but also all kinds of corporealities produced by four origins through inevitable method (***avinābhāva  naya***).  It  means  all  un-derived  and  derived  corporealities  produced  by  four origins. If all those corporealities are discerned minglingly, there will be no disadvantage really. 

**PAGE-464** 

With  regarding  to  associating  mental  concomitant  which  arise  due  to  compatible consciousness,  it  must  be  inferred  at  various  mind-moments  as  mentioned  in  tables  of ***nāmakammaṭṭhaṇā***, **Volume II**, accordingly. 
PAGE15
