Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE3322

I believe Noble Triple Gems, action and consequence of action, past life, future life etc. (It is the self-identity view which arises depending on faith called ***saddhā***.) 

I never forget on various right deeds; I have got powerful mindfulness; I remember every  thing;  I  can  discern  corporeality-mentality; I  can  discern both  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas***;  I  can  discern  three  general  characters  called  ***anicca,  dukkha,  anatta***  of corporeality-mentality-cause-results. (It is the self-identity view which arises depending on mindfulness called ***sati.*)*** 

I usually have got shame to commit misdeed. (It is the self-identity view which clings to shame called ***hirī.*)*** 

I usually have got dread to commit misdeed. (It is the self-identity view which clings to dread called ***ottappa***.) 

**PAGE-533** 

I usually have not got heartfelt desire. (It is the self-identity view which clings to “greedlessness called ***alobha***.”) 

I  am  not  angry.  (It  is  the  self-identity  view  which  clings  to  hatelessness  called ***adosa***.”). 

I can regard with equanimity on corporeality-mentality. (It is the self-identity view which clings to equanimity called ***tatramajjhattatā.***) 

I  have  hot  tranquility  to  practice.  (It  is  the  self-identity  view  which  clings  to “tranquility called ***passaddhi***.”) 

I have got agility to practice. (It is the self-identity view which clings to agility called ***lahutā***..) 

I have got elasticity to practice. (It is the self-identity view which clings to elasticity called ***mudutā***.) 

I  have  got  adaptability  to  practice.  (It  is  the  self-identity  view  which  clings  to adaptability called ***kammaññatā***.) 

I  have  got  proficiency  to  practice.  (It  is  the  self-identity  view  which  clings  to proficiency called ***pāguññatā***.) 

I have got righteous attitude. (It is the self-identity view which clings to righteousness called ***ujukatā***.) 

I can restrain from bodily misdeeds. (It is the self-identity view which clings to right bodily action called ***sammākammanta***.) 

I can restrain from verbally misdeeds. (It is the self-identity view which clings to right verbally action called ***sammā vācā***.) 

I can restrain from wrong livelihood. (It is the self-identity view which clings to right livelihood called ***sammā ājīva***.) 

I observe the eight Buddhist precepts every week; I have resolute morality; I have resolved to stop killing other beings. (It is the self-identity view which clings to refraining mental concomitants called ***viraticetasika***.”) 

I felt a great pity for those beings with troubles and sufferings. (It is the self-identity view which clings to sympathetic joy called ***karuṇā***”) 

I rejoice to see those beings with happiness. (It is the self-identity view which clings to rejoicing mental concomitant called ***muditā***.) 

I  know  and  see  penetratively  on  conditioned  things  called  corporeality-mentality- cause-result. (It is the self-identity view which clings to controlling faculty of wisdom mental concomitant called ***paññindriya*** ***cetasika***.) 
PAGE31

These are showing how self-identity view arises depending on mental concomitants of formation aggregate in brief. It should be understood how four kinds of self-identity views arise depending on each mental concomitant by taking above examples. 

**An example\_\_\_\_\_** 

1. The volition is the self-identity. 
1. I have got volition. 
1. The volition which lies within my self-identity. 
1. My self-identity which lies whining the volition. 

In this way one views variously on the volition. It should be understood similarly on 

(50) kinds of mental concomitants which are inclusive in formation aggregate. 

**E. Four kinds of self-identity views on the consciousness aggregate *(viññāṇakkhandhā)*** 

1. ***viññāṇam  attato  samanupassati***  =  Consciousness  is  viewed  through  self  (=  as occurrence of self). 
1. ***viññāṇavantam vā attānam*** = One views the self which has got consciousness. 
1. ***attani vā viññāṇam*** = One views in a way that consciousness lies within the self. 

**PAGE-534** 

4. ***viññāṇasamim  vā  attānam***  =  One  views  in  a  way  that  the  self  lies  within consciousness. 

Number (1) is a kind of belief by which self-identity and consciousness are clung as a single thing while remaining three view on corporeality-feeling-perception-formations as the self and then the self and consciousness are clung as separate ones. 

**Examples to be understood \_\_\_\_\_** 

1. The consciousness is the self-identity. 
1. the consciousness is my property. 
1. I  see  someone,  something.  (It  is  the  self-identity  view  which  clings  to  seeing- consciousness.) 
1. I  hear  someone,  something.  (It  is  the  self-identity  view  which  clings  to  hearing- consciousness.) 
1. I  smell  something  burning.  (It  is  the  self-identity  view  which  clings  to  smelling- consciousness.) 
1. I taste sweet and sour foods. (It is the self-identity view which clings to tasting- consciousness.) 
1. I perceive cold or hot, rough or smooth nature by touching. (It is the self-identity view which clings to touching-consciousness.) 
1. I consider by means of mind-consciousness; I think by means of mind-consciousness; I realize by means of mind-consciousness. (It is the self-identity view which clings to mind-consciousness.) 

**The self-identity view on all (5) aggregates as a whole** 

All  explanations  mentioned  above  are  showing  how  self-identity  view  arises depending on each aggregate. Furthermore every utterance, such as I go, I come, I do, I say etc., depending on all (5) aggregate on a whole, is also the self-identity view really. 

Those worldling persons who have wrong perceptions in a way that “person is present really; being is present  really; human is present really; *deva* is present really;  woman is present really; man is present really; my self-identity is present really; other’s self-identity is present really; always say noisily that “I, my, he” etc. and then every word is followed by 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE34

wrong  perception.  Those  Noble-Ones  who  have  finished  to  remove  self-identity  view, actually, usually utter through conventional reality, as done by common people. However there is no wrong perception in their mind. Although they utter that ‘I, my’ etc., they never think as real phenomenon. 

It should be recognized these nature of self-identity view can cling by means of three factors, viz., through wrong view, through wrong perception, through consciousness.  

**PAGE-535** 

7. **Eternity wrong view *(sassata diṭṭhi)* and annihilation view *(uccheda diṭṭhi)*** 

The opinion which believes that “the self annihilates after death, is annihilation view. The opinion which believes that “the self is eternal and permanent”, is eternity wrong view. 

When each aggregate is clung as the self, i.e., 

1. corporeality is clung as self, 
1. feeling is clung as self, 
1. perception is clung as self, 
1. formations are clung as self, 
1. consciousness is clung as self, 

destruction of those five aggregates is obvious and one believes that the self is destroyed; the self is annihilated, resulting in occurrence of both annihilation view, self-identity view an self-belief. That annihilation view is also known as ***vibhava*** ***diṭṭhi*** (wrong view on go out of existence). 

Furthermore when one believes the self which has got corporeality, the self which has got feeling, the self which has got perception, the self which has got formations, the self which has got consciousness those five aggregates and the self are clung as separate ones and then  an  opinion  that  “although  those  five  aggregates  are  destroyed  the  self  is  never destroyed”.. arises consequently, resulting in occurrence of both eternity wrong view and self-identity view. That eternity wrong view is also known as ***bhavadiṭṭhi*** (wrong view on coming-into-existence). 

All kinds of wrong views, such as (62) kinds of wrong views preached in ***Brahmajāla*** ***Sutta*** etc, originate from this self-identity view. This self-identity view is the fundamental seed of every wrong view. In the second ***Isidatta*** ***Sutta***, ***Citta*** ***Samyutta***, ***Saļāyatana*** ***Vagga***, it is preached that if the self-identity view is present, these wrong views can arise; if the self- identity view is absent, these wrong views can not arise. 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-478)*** 

8. **Indefinite self-identity view** 

In present days some Buddhist in Myanmar believes anyone of aggregates, especially on the consciousness as the self, even though they can not say definitely on which one. Although the term, self ***(atta),*** is not applied definitely, those usages, such as.. **vital** **body, butterfly, soul*,*** which are the same meaning of that term, ***atta***, are applied influentially. When a person passes away they usually say that “vitality has gone out”; when a person has got coma after serious sickness they believe that butterfly has gone out and they usually say that “the butterfly is taken back again”; when a person is startled, he usually says that “the butterfly is blown away”; when children are frightened they usually say that “don’t frighten children! Butterfly can be blown away” etc; they usually believe that dead person’s butterfly comes and takes his or her lover’s butterfly or butterflies of both dead person an his or her lover are stuck together and then they usually say that “those butterflies must be separated” etc., Some believe that the soul reincarnates from one life to another after death. 
PAGE33

**PAGE-536** 

These self-believes are  very comprehensive. Some usually believe that the self is present in not only internal body but also external non-living world, trees, forest, mountain, water, ground etc. 

***jīvasaññino hi moghapurisā manussā rukkhasamim. (Vi-2-51, 52)*** 

9. **It can prohibit the Noble Path** 

***tā sabbāpi maggāvaraṇā, na saggāvaraṇā, pathamamaggavajjhāti veditabbā. (Abhi-A-1- 388)*** 

These (15) kinds of wrong views on coming-into-existence ( ***bhava*** ***diṭṭhi***) and (5) kinds of wrong views on go out of existence (***vibhavadiṭṭhi***) can prohibit not to attain the Noble Path Knowledge but not the attainment of joyful existences of heavenly beings etc. Those (20) kinds of self-identity views are only ***dhammas*** which are eradicated by the First Noble Path-Knowledge called ***Sotāpattimagga*** ***ñāṇa. (Abhi-A-1-388)*** 

Only when conditioned things can be discerned as three general characters alternately, can the Noble Path be attained really. The Noble Path can not be reached by discerning as mere ***anicca*** or ***dukkha*** or ***anatta*** on conditioned things. ***(Vs-2-301)*** 

Among  those  three  kinds  of  general  characters,  ***anattānupassanā  ñāṇa*** (contemplation on non-self) is also included. Only when conditioned things can be discerned and seen by the help of ***anattānupassanā ñāṇa***, can the Noble Path and Fruit be attained. In other words, if conditioned things are discerned as the self through the self-identity view, the knowledge can not reach to the character of non-self called ***anatta***, result-in inability to reach the Path and Fruit. It can, therefore, be said “this self-identity view can prohibit not to attain the Noble Path-Knowledge. However those self-identity views are not ***dhammas*** which can prohibit not to attain joyful existences of heavenly beings etc., because the person with self- identity view clinging can reach joyful existences of heavenly beings etc. 

The self-belief clinging ***(attavādupādāna),***which is called the principle, that firmly clings and utters on the ‘self’, in other words, the self-belief clinging which is merely self- belief which firmly clings as the self, arises continuously by basing on these (20) kinds of self-identity views. 

10. ***upattikkama-pahānakkama-desanākkama*** 

There are three kinds of consistency, viz., 

1. ***upattikkama*** = consistency of arising, 
1. ***pahānakkama*** = consistency of abandonment by the Noble Path, 
1. ***deanākkama*** = consistency of preaching. 
1. ***upattikkama*** \_\_\_\_\_ Because it can not be said that “this kind of defilement arises previously and obviously in the infinite rounds of rebirth ***(samsāra),*** the consistency of arising of defilements, ignorance, craving etc., cannot be said definitely. However if it is said by indirect way ***(pariyāya),*** the views clinging usually arises in any life in general through either eternity wrong view or annihilation view previously. Afterwards in the continuum of the person who believes that this self is eternal and 

permanent, the rule & rite clinging usually arises for purification of the self. 

**PAGE-537** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE36

Then in the continuum of the person who believes that future life is absent and who does not take the future life into consideration, due to presence of annihilation view, the sensual clinging called ***kāmupādāna*** usually arises. Thus in the first, self-belief clinging, afterward views-clinging, rule & rite clinging, sensual clinging usually arise in sequence. This is the consistency of arising called ***upattikkama*** of (4) kinds of clinging in one life. ***(Abhi-A-2-173, Vs-2-204, 205)*** 

2. ***pahānakkama*** \_\_\_\_\_ Views clinging, rule & right clinging, self-belief clinging are worth eradicating previously because those are ***dhammas*** which are worth eradicating by the Path of Upstream-enterer. Sensual clinging, actually, is the clinging which is worth eradicating later because it is worth eradicating by the Path of Arahant. ***(Abhi- A-2-173, Vs-2-205)*** 
2. ***desanākkama*** \_\_\_\_\_ Among four kinds of clinging, sensual clinging was preached previously because it is vast concern and obvious in the world. That sensual clinging is vast concern, due to associating with all (8) kinds of consciousness rooted in greed. Remaining three kinds of clinging are limited concern, due to associating with only 

   4) kinds of consciousness with wrong view, rooted in greed. Generally the sensual clinging is obvious in all beings with delights on aggregates of fivefold clinging to existence ***(pañcupādānakkhandhā).*** Remaining kinds of clinging, however, are not obvious. 

The  person  with  strong  sensual  clinging  usually  studies  only  worldly  sources  of prosperity  assiduously,  such  as  auspicious  sight,  auspicious  sound,  auspicious  touch (***mutamangala)*** etc., in  order to attain loving  and non-living bases of  sensuality  without believing on action and consequence of action ***(kammavipāka)*** or without regarding on action and consequence of action although they believe on action and consequence of action. That kind of belief on worldly sources or prosperity is the view-clinging really. Therefore views clinging is preached successively after sensual clinging. 

If  those  views  clinging  are  subdivided,  there  are  two  varieties,  viz.,  rule  &  rite clinging, self-belief clinging. Among those two kinds, rule &  rite clinging was preached previously, due to deserving to understand by the sight only on either cow’s habit or dog’s habit. Finally self-belief clinging was preached, due to occurrence of subtle nature. This is the consistency of preaching ***(desanākkama). (Abhi-A-2-173, Vs-2-205)*** 

6. **Conditional relations** 
1. Sensual  craving  benefits  sensual  clinging  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of determinative dependence only. It is because sensual clinging arises depending on objects which are worth delighting exceedingly through craving. ***(Abhi-A-2-173, Vs- 2-205)*** 

In  this  case  it  should  be  recognized  on  the  term,  ***upanissaya***  (determinative dependence),  as  all  three  kinds,  ***ārammaṇupanissaya***  (object  determinative  dependence), ***anantarūpanissaya***  (contiguous  determinative  dependence),  ***pakatūpanissaya***  (natural determinative dependence). It should be recognized those relations, ***anantara, samanantara, natthi, vigata***, are inclusive in ***anantarūpanissaya***. 

**PAGE-538** 

2. Furthermore  that  sensual  craving  benefits  three  kinds  of  clinging,  viz.,  views clinging, rule & rite clinging, self-belief clinging by means of efficiency of either (7) 
PAGE35

kinds of relations, viz., ***sahajāta, aññamañña, nissaya, sampayutta, atthi, avigata, hetu*** or (8) kinds of relations together with the relation of determinative dependence ***(upanissaya).*** In such time that  craving benefits those three  kinds of  clinging by means of efficiency of relation of determinative dependence; at that time that craving and those kinds of clingings are not compatible ***dhammas*** within one mind moment. It should be recognized in this way. (It means those are separated by numerous mind moments.) 

7. **Way of keeping in mind cause & result** 

In this stage present causal ***dhammas*** are cultivated for the purpose of attainment of the future resultant ***dhammas***. Especially this is the section in which causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how clinging arises, due to the craving, which is inclusive  in  defilement  round  and  action  round,  which  is  cultivated  for  the  purpose  of attainment of anyone of future lives. Therefore if any kind of defilement round and action round, which are usual cultivated for anyone of future lives, are discerned closely together, it can be easy understood. 

For  instance\_\_\_\_\_  If  a  righteous ***meditator***  cultivates  defilement  round  and  action  round frequently as possible as opportunity is available with the purpose of attainment of preacher *deva* in future life, any kind of defilement round and action round which are he like best must be selected among those defilement round and action round. 

1. The nature of wrong knowing as preacher *deva* is the ignorance ***(avijjā).*** 
1. The  nature  of  heartfelt  desire  on  sufficiency  of  life  ***(bhavasampatti)***  called  that preacher *deva* life and sufficiency of luxury ***(bhogasampatti)*** called *deva*’s luxury, is the sensual craving. In other words, the craving on preacher *deva*’s life, which is associated  by  wrong  view  on  coming-into-existence  ***(bhavadiṭṭhi)***  and  self-belief wrong view ***(attadiṭṭhi)*** is the craving to coming-into-existence ***(bhavataṇhā).*** 
1. Due to arising of that sensual craving, the sensual clinging which obsesses on *deva*’s life and luxury arises. In the next method, due to arising of that craving to coming- into-existence, the self-belied clinging arises. 

If sensual clinging on various bases of sensuality arises by basing on the sensual craving n various living and non-living bases of sensuality, causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept  in  mind  by  seeing  how  that  sensual  clinging  arises,  due  to  sensual  craving  as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Due to arising of sensual craving, sensual clinging arises. 

Sensual craving is the causal ***dhamma***; sensual clinging is the resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-539** 

In  the  next  method  –  If  the  craving  to  coming-into-existence  ***(bhavataṇhā)*** associating  with  self-belief  wrong  view,  which  obsesses  as  preacher  *deva*  through  self- identity view, which believes that preacher *deva*’s life is present really, arises in him, causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how self-belief clinging arises, due to that craving to coming-into-existence as follows. – 

2. Due to arising of craving to coming-into-existence, self-belief clinging arises. Craving to coming-into-existence is the causal ***dhamma***; self-belief clinging is resultant ***dhamma***. 

***Pāli Quotation (Mūlaṭī-2-121)*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE38

The  meaning  of  this  explanation  of ***Mūlaṭīkā***  is presented  in previous page,  526, under the heading of “the next method”. If anyone of (5) aggregates is inferred as the self, remaining four aggregates can be inferred as the world ***(loka)*** with the result that the opinion which believes the world is eternal” is a wrong view only. When succeeding wrong view clings on preceding wrong view again succeeding wrong view is known as views clinging ***(diṭṭhupādāna).*** The craving which associates with preceding wrong view is the craving to coming-into-existence. Cause and result must be kept in mind by seeing how views clinging called  succeeding  wrong  view  arises,  due  to  that  craving  to  coming-into-existence  as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

3. Due  to  arising  of  craving  to  coming-into-existence,  views  clinging  arises.  Craving  to coming-into-existence is causal ***dhamma***; views clinging is resultant ***dhamma***. 

For a righteous ***meditator*** who reaches into this stage of purification of overcoming doubt  with  the  knowledge  of  cause  and  condition,  the  rule  &  rite  clinging  called ***sīlabbatupādāna*** is impossible to arise in future. That kind of clinging may be experienced in previous lives of rounds of rebirth accordingly. This is the way of keeping in mind cause & result on a whole.  If it is intended to be discerned separately, anyone should discern  as follows;\_\_\_\_\_ 

**2.11.8. The next method – How cause & result can be kept in mind separately*** 

1. The sight craving which arises through strong delighting in visible-objects that will be attained in preacher *deva*’s life is called the sensual craving. 
1. The  sight  craving,  which  arises  together  with  eternity  wring  view  in  a  way  “that visible-object  is  permanent  and  eternal”,  is  called  the  craving  to  coming-into- existence. 
1. The sight craving, which arises together with annihilation view in a way that visible- object is destroyed  and annihilated after death, is called the  craving to  go out of existence. 

Thus the sight craving varies as three kinds, viz., sensual craving, craving to coming- into-existence, craving to go out of existence. Remaining kinds of craving, the sound craving etc., also vary in each three kinds. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how three kinds of clingings, sensual clinging etc., arise, due to visual sensual craving etc. 

**PAGE-540** 

1. Due to arising of visual sensual craving, sensual clinging arises. Visual sensual craving is causal ***dhamma***; sensual clinging is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  visual  craving  to  coming-into-existence,  views  clinging  arises. (eternity wrong view) Visual craving to coming-into-existence is causal ***dhamma***; view clinging is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due  to  arising  of  visual  craving  to  go  out  of  existence,  views  clinging  arises. (annihilation view) 

Visual craving to go out of existence is causal ***dhamma***; views clinging is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE37

**2.11.9 The next method of discerning** 

Because those kinds of cravings, craving to coming-into-existence, which associates with  eternity  wrong  view  and  craving  to  go  out  of  existence,  which  associates  with annihilation view, are the cravings which arise basing on self-belief wrong view, one can discern as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. Due to arising of visual craving to coming-into-existence, self-belief clinging arises. Visual  craving  to  coming-into-existence  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  self-belief  clinging  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of visual craving to go out of existence, self-belief clinging arises. Visual  craving  to  got  out  of  existence  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  self-belief  clinging  is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Sound craving …R… ideational craving ***(dhammataṇhā)*** must also be discerned in similar way, If the righteous ***meditator*** cultivates seeds of perfection with heartfelt desire to attain the life of a ***bhikkhu*** who can propagate the Buddha’s admonishment in future or if he develops superior  kinds of  absorptions for the purpose of attainment of brahma’s life in future, he should like to discern similarly as shown in this example of preacher *deva*’s life. 

It can be very difficult to arise those kinds of clinging, views clinging, rule & rite clinging,  self-belief  clinging  for  the  righteous  ***meditator***  who  has  got  various  kinds  of knowledge upto knowledge of cause & condition. Only sensual clinging can arise in him frequently. Unless the ***meditator*** has got the knowledge of Analysing Mentality-Materiality and the Knowledge of Cause & Condition, those four kinds of clinging can arise accordingly. If a ***meditator*** can discern the sensual clinging only, cause & result must be kept in mind by seeing relationship between sensual craving and sensual clinging only. Those (4) kinds of clingings are preached on a whole for all beings. Therefore it will be presented on usual sensual craving and sensual clinging which arise in continuity of each mind-door-cognitive process as example. 



||Mind-door adverting |(7) times of impulsions |(2) times of registerings |
| :- | :-: | - | - |
|Visual sensual craving |12 |20 (greed, wrong view) |12 |
|Clinging |12 |20 ( greed, wring view) |12 |
**PAGE-541** 

Sometimes impulsions and registering consciousness which associate with neutrality feeling can arise. Groups of defilements round which are cultivated for future coming-into- existence must be scrutinized carefully. Both sides of causal ***dhammas***, sensual craving and resultant ***dhammas***, sensual clinging must be discerned in order to reach the field of ultimate nature  after  breaking  down  each  compactness  of  mentality  called  block  of  mentality  by penetrative knowledge. Registering consciousness do not fall sometimes. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE40

**PAGE-542** 

**2.12 *Upādāna paccayā bhavo*** 

**Clinging is the condirion for coming-into-existence** 

**1. The meaning of coming-into-existence (*bhava*)** 

“***bhavatī ti bhavo***” = The nature which is capable of coming-into-existence is called “***bhava***”. According to the Texts that coming–into-existence has a twofold aspect: ***kamma*** coming -into-existence (***kamma bhava***) and rebirth coming-into-existence (***upa pattibhava***). The action called ***kamma*** is ***kamma*** coming-into-existence. The resultant ***dhamma*** which is produced by the action (***kamma***) is called rebirth coming-into-existence. 

1. In  these  two  kinds  of  coming-into-existence  consequence  mental  aggregates  and corporealities produced by ***kamma***. (***kammaja rūpa***) have got designation as “***bhava***” (coming-into-existence) because the former are resultant ***dhammas*** produced by ***kamma*** (action), in accordance with ***bhavatīti bhavo*** (the nature which is capable of coming-into- existence is called ***bhava***). 
1. In the words, “***sukho buddhānamuppādo***” the appearing of the Buddhas is bliss, it is preached with referring to the fact that ***buddhuppāda navamakhaṇa*** called the appearing of the Buddhas which is the source of attainment of bliss is bliss through metaphorical usage called ***phalūpacāra***. Similarly, the action (***kamma***) called ***kamma*** coming-into- existence has got designation as ***bhava*** because it is the source of consequence ***dhammas*** called rebirth coming-into-existence (***upapattibhava***) with refrring to the word, ***bhavatīti bhavo. (Abhi-A-2-174)*** 

**The meaning** \_\_\_\_\_ The occurrence of causal ***dhammas*** is called ***kamma bhava*** (***kamma*** coming-into-existence) while the occurrence of resultant ***dhammas***, ***upapattibhava*** (rebirth coming-into-existence). The ***kamma*** coming-into-existence is the nature of cause of arising  while  the  rebirth  coming-into-existence,  the  nature  of  arising  indeed.  Those  are, therefore,  the  causal  coming-into-existence  and  the  resultant  coming-into-existence repectively. 

**2. The basic meaning of *kammabhava*** 

Both  wholesome  volition,  unwholesome  volition  and  ***dhammas***  which  are  worth designating as ***kamma***, ***abhijjā*** (ill will) etc., which are associating with volition, are called ***kamma*** coming-into-existence. (***Vs-2-206***) 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-2-143; Vs-2-206)*** 

In accordance with above Pali Text, both these (29) kinds of volition, to wit, 

1. great wholesome volition of sensual sphere (***kāmāvacara mahā kusala cetanā***) …… (8), 
1. unwholesome volition ….. (12), which are called ***paritta bhūmaka***; 
1. wholesome volition of fine-material sphere ***(rūpāvacara kusala cetanā)*** …………..….(5) 
1. Wholesome  volition  of  immaterial  sphere  ***(a-rūpāvacara  kusala  cetanā)***  ……….(4), which are called ***mahābhūmaka***; and 

**Page-543** 
PAGE39

5. ***dhammas, abhijjā*** (ill-will)etc., which are associating with those kinds of volition, which are  source  of  cyclic ***dhammas  (vaṭṭanissita)***,  with  regarding  to  the  word, ***"sabbampi bhavagāmikanmam"***, 

are designated as ***kamma*** coming-into-existence ***(Kammabhava)***. 

In this case the word, ***"bhvagāmikamma"***, means actions which are source of cyclic ***dhammas (vaṭṭanissita kamma)***, which are capable of reaching to various existances really. Here "capable of reaching to various existances" means the occurrence that leading to any kind of existence during performaing action by means of presence of efficiency which can accomplish resultant consequence aggregates. 

For  instance,  during  performing  wholesome  deeds  of  sensual  sphere  called ***puññābhisankhāra***  with  an  intertion  to  become  a  ***deva***  who  is  preacher  in  future,  the inclination towards devahood can be said ***vaṭṭanissita kamma***. If the action is performed with inclination towards devahood, that kind of action has efficiency to occur consequence (5) aggregates called devahood who is a preacher when it is mtures. That kind of action, which is performed  with  the  inclination  towards  an  existence  where  consequence  five  aggregates stand, whichhas efficiency to occur consequence (5) aggregates, is called ***bhavagāmi kamma*** (action which is capable of reaching to various existences).  In other words, it should be recognized that ability to arise resultant consequence ***dhammas*** means “capable of reaching” in this case. ***(Abhi-A-2-174, Vs-2-206, Mūlaṭī-2-122, Mahāṭī-2-330)*** 

3. **The basic meaning of upapattibhava** 

***upapattibhava pana sankhepato kammābhinibbattā khandhā. (Vs-2-206)*** 

In accordance with the word, ***upapattibhava***, the basic meaning must be interpreted as mundane consequence mental aggregates and corporealities produced by ***kamma (kammaja rūpa)***, which are resultant from ***kamma***. However ***dhammas***, sound-base ***(saddāyatana)***, etc., which are neither consequence nor corporealities produced by ***kamma***, must be omitted. ***(See Abhi-3-13)*** 

4. **Nine kinds of classifications of coming-into-existences** 
1) ***Kāmabhava* (sensual coming-into-existence)** 

Sensual consequence mind and mental concomitants and corporealities produced by ***kamma*** called ***upādiññākkhandhā***, which are occurring in (11) realms of sensual sphere from ***avīci*** hell to heavenly plane called ***paranimitta vasavatti*** are called ***kāma***. Due to deserving by craving on sensual desire, those ***dhammas*** are designated as ***kāma***. Due to occurece of base of defilement sensual desire (***kilesā kāmma**),* consequent corporealities and mentalities called ***upādiññākkhandhā*** are worth designating as ***kāma* .** Due to synchronous occurrence with defilement sensual desire called craving on sensual desire, those ***upādiññākkhandhā*** have got designation as ***kāma*** through ***sahacaraṇa*** method of preaching. Due to occurrence of object of the craving on sensual desire, those are desighnted as ***kāma***. Due to occurrence of source of causal ***dhammas*** of craving on sensual desire, those are designated as ***kāma***. Due to arising  through  action  (***kamma*)**,  those  consequence  mental  ***dhamma***  and  corporealities produced by ***kamma*** are designated as coming-into-existence with regarding to the words, ***bhavatīti bhavo*.** By combination of two words, ***kāmma*** and ***bhava, kāmabhava*** (sensual coming-into-existence) is designated. ***(Abhi-A-2-174, Mahāṭī-2-331)*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE42

**Page-544** 

2) ***rūpabhava* (fine-material coming-into-existence)** 

Fine-material consequence mind and mental concomitants and ***upādiññākkhandhā*** called corporealities produced by ***kamma***, which are occurring in the First Absorption Plane of ***brahma***  and ***akaniṭṭha  brahma***  are  called ***rūpa*** (fine  material).  Due  to  occurrence  of standing base of craving on fine-material sphere ***(rūpatanhā)***, those ***upādiññākkhandhā*** are designated as ***rūpa*** through preaching methodology called ***thanyu pacara***. By combination of two words, ***rūpa*** and ***bhava***, ***rūpabhava*** (fine-material coming-into-existence) is designated. Sixteen realms of fine-material sphere are ***rūpabhava***, indeed. 

3) ***arūpabhava* (immaterial coming-into-existence)** 

Immaterial consequence four mental aggregates, which are occurring in realms from realm of boundless space to realm of neither-perception-nor-non-perception called supreme realm  ***(bhavagga)***,  are  designated  as  ***arūpa***  (immaterial).  Due  to  taking  as  object  on immaterial consequence by craving on immaterial sphere, those ***upādiññākkhandhā*** called immaterial consequence four mental aggregates are designated as ***a-rūpa*** through preaching methodology  called  ***phalūpacāra***.  By  combination  of  two  words,  ***arūpa***  and  ***bhava***, ***arūpabhava*** (immaterial coming-into-existence) is designated. Those are of four realms of immaterial sphere indeed. 

Due  to  occurrence  resulting  from  sensual  actions  ***(kāmāvacara  kamma)***,  sensual consequence  corporeality-mentality  called  ***kāma***  are  designated  as  ***kāmabhava***.  Due  to occurrence  resulting  from  fine-material  actions  ***(rūpavacara  kamma)***,  fine-material consequence  corporeality-mentality  called  ***rūpa***  are  designated  as  ***rūpabhava***.  Due  to occurrence resulting from immaterial actions ***(a-rūpāvacara kamma)***, consequence mental ***dhammas*** called  ***arūpa*** are designated as ***arūpabhava***. It means in this way. 

4) ***saññābhava***  =  coming-into-existence  with  perception,  i.e.,  (29)  realms  occurring  in ***kāma-rūpa-arūpa***, except realm of mindless being ***(asaññāsatta)*** and 

 realm of neither-preception-nor-non-preception, 

5) ***asaññābhava*** = coming-into-existece without perception, i.e., realm of mindless being ***(asaññāsatta)*** 
5) ***nevasaññā nā saññābhava*** = the realm without gross perception but sutable perception 
5) ***ekavokāabhava***  =  coming-into-exiatence  with  corporeal  aggregate  called ***upādiññākkhandhā*** only, i.e, mindless being 
5) ***catuvokārabhava***  =  coming-into-existence  with  four  mental  aggregates  called ***upādiññānāmakkhandhā***, i.e, four realms of immaterial sphere 
5) ***pañcavokārabhava***  =  coming-into-existence  with  five  aggregates  called ***upādiññākkhandhā***, i.e, ***kāmabhava***, ***rūpabhava*** **(*Abhi-A-2-175*)** 
5. **Beneficial way of preaching** 
PAGE41

As  ***puññābhisaṅkhāra***,  ***apuññābhisaṅkhāra***,  ***aneñjābhisaṅkhāra***  are  preached  in this  section  of  ***bhavaniddesa***  (classification  of  coming-into-existence)  those  formations, ***puññābhisaṅkhāra***, ***apuññābhisaṅkhāra***, ***aneñjābhisaṅkhāra*** were preached in section of ***saṅkhāraniddesa*** (classification of formations). 

However in previous section of ***saṅkhāraniddesa***, those kinds of formations were preached, due to occurrence of casual ***dhammas*** of ***paṭisandhi*** (process of newly occurrence of next existence) in this present coming-into-existence, by means of previous action. In this section of ***bhavaniddesa***, on the other hand, those kinds of formations are preached, due to occurrence ofcasual ***dhammas*** of  ***paṭisandhi*** in future coming-into-existence, by means of present action.  In this section of ***bhava niddesa*** preaching on those  kinds of formations, ***puññābhisaṅkhāra*** etc, again, therefore, is beneficial. In the next method, \_\_\_\_\_ in previous section of ***saṅkhāra niddesa***,  mere wholesome volition unwholesome  volition other than associating  ***dhammas***  were  preached  as  formations  ***(saṅkhāra)***.  In  this  section  of ***bhavaniddesa***, on the other hand, due to presence of preaching in a way that ***“sabbampi bhavagāmikammam”***, not only mundane wholesome volition and unwholesome volition but associating mind and mental concomitants are preached as concerning to ***kamma*** coming- into-existence ***(kammabhava)***. 

Furthermore,  in  previous  section  of  ***saṅkhāra  niddesa***,  pure  action  which  is  the condition for consciousness was preached as formation ***(saṅkhāra)***. In this section of ***bhava niddesa***,  on  the  other  hand,  the  action  **(*kamma*)***  that  is  capable  of  producing  mindless coming-into-existence called nonad corporeal unit with life-faculty as ninth factors, is also preached. 

**PAGE-545** 

In the next method.\_\_\_\_\_ How it will be benefical by saying so much really.\_\_\_\_\_ With  relating  to  the  word,  "***avijjā  paccayā  saṅkhārā  =***   ignorance  is  the  condition  for formation",  only  wholesome  and  unwholesome  ***dhammas***,   ***puññābhisaṅkhāra***  etc.,  are preached as formations. With relaing to this word, "***upādāna paccayā bhavo =*** clinging is the condition for coming-into-existence", however, due to concerning with both kinds of ***kamma*** coming-into-existence  ***(kammabhava)***  and  rebirth-coming-into-existence  ***(upapattihava)***, these four kinds of ***dhammas***,  

1. wholesome 
1. unwholesome 
1. consequence ***abyākata*** (mental ***dhamma***) 
1. corporeality produced by ***kamma*** called corporeal ***abyākata***, 

are  worth preaching.  Therefore  it  should be  recognized  the  fact  that  even  though formations  ***(saṅkhāra)***  were  already  preached,  the  way  of  preaching  on  coming-into- existence again is beneficial. ***(Abhi-A-2-175, Vs-2-207)*** 

6. **Varieties of clinging and coming-into-existence** 

Due  to  presence  of  source  of  clinging-to-sensual-desire  ***(kāmupadāna)***  sensual actions ***(kāmāvacara kamma)*** called ***puññābhisaṅkhāra***, ***apuññābhisaṅkhāra***, which can give rise to sensual coming-into-existence, are cultivated. The nature of that action ***(kamma)*** is  called  ***kammabhava***.  Aggregates  which  are  produced  by  that  ***kammabhava***  are  called ***upapattibhava***. It should be understood similarly on fine-material coming-into-existence and immaterial coming-into-existence. It should be understood how sensual ***kamma*** coming-into- existence,  sensual  rebirth  coming-into-existence,  fine-material  ***kamma***  coming-into- existence,  fine-material  rebirth  coming-into-existence,  immaterial  ***kamma***  coming-into-

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

existence,  immaterial  rebirth  coming-into-existence  can  be  resulted  from  the  sources  of clinging-to-wrong-views  ***(diṭṭhupādāna)***,  clinging-to-rules  &  rites  ***(sīlabbatupādāna)***, clinging-to-self-opinion ***(attavādupādāna)***. It should be recognized the fact due to presence of clinging, two kinds of coming-into-existence, ***kamma bhava*** and ***upapattibhava*** can be occurred accordingly without differentiating specific kind of clinging but generally. 

7. ***puthujjano ummattako* (worldlings are insane) *Pali Quotation (Abhi-A-2-176, Vs-2-208)*** 

Due to presence of whatever kind of clinging every kind of coming-into-existence (called ***kāma-rūpa-arūpa)*** can be occurred. Because worldling person is similar to insane person, he never consider and bear in mind that "this ought to be done, this oughtn't to be done" etc., with the result that any kind of action which is the source of reaching into various coming-into-existence is performed randomly with heartfelt desire on any kind of coming- into-existence, due to presence of any kind of clinging. Some teachers of school of other thought said that fine-material and immaterial coming-into-existence can not be occurred, due to ***sīlabbatu pādāna*** (clinging-to-rules and rites). That word oughtn't to be accepted. It should be accepted, actually, the word, all kinds of coming-into-existence can be occurred, due to all kinds of clinging. **(Abhi-A-2-176, Vs-2-208)** 

**Page-546** 

 Those  teachers  of  other  school  of  thought  that  in  the  continuum  of  person  with    ***sīlabbatupādāna***  finematerial  coming-into-existence  and  immaterial  coming-into-existence can not be occurred because they thought absorportion practice **(*jhānabhāvana*)** can not be fulfilled in the continuum of person with ***sīlabbatupādāna*,** resulting from wrong way of consideration on the statement of ***kukkuravatika Sutta*** that “due to presence of complete practices of cattees and dogs, association with cattles and dogs can be resrlted”. A way of consideration that “practice of cattles **(*gosīla*),** practice of dogs **(*govata*)** etc, are factors of purification from both defilements and rounds of rebirth" is called ***sīlabbatupādāna* .** Due to presence of that way of consideration as factors of purification from defilements and rounds of rebirth called ***suddhimaggaparāmasana*,** it should not concluded that absorptions of fine material sphere and immaterial sphere can not be occurred in them but it can be occurred really. **(*Mahātī*-2-332).** 

8. **Clinging- to-sensual desire and woeful rounds of rebirth (*apāyasam sāra*).** 

In this world, by reasoning in a way that these kinds of sensual desire are fulfilled in the continuum of weally persons of king clan, ***brahma*** clan, wealthy clan and six planes of ***devas*** of sensual sphere through hearing from others or experienced in seeing such manner, some persons perform unwholesome deeds such as offering sacrifice by killing animals, etc, in order to obtain those kinds of sensual desire and various objects of sensual desire after thinking in a way that these sensual desire can be obtained by performing this action resulting from misleading through. 

1. listening to ***dhammas*** of villainous person. 
1. association with villainous persons  
1. Lack of previous wholesome merits called ***pubbeca katapuñña*,**  
1. incapability  to  restraint  bodily,  verbally  and  mentally  actions  of  oneself  called ***attasammāpanidhi*** in present life. Due to fulfillment of unwholesome ***dhammas*,** that person 
PAGE43

becomes  woeful  coming-into-existence.  Furthermore\_\_\_\_\_  due  to  presence  of  source  of clinging-to-sensual  desire,  bodily  misdeeds  are  performed  in  order  to  heartfelt  desire  on various kinds of objects of sensuality in present life or in order to protect acquired variors kinds of objects of sensuality. (It means stealing, robbery performed by oneself, killing to thief, robber who steals, robs one's properties.) Due to fulfilment of unwholesome ***dhammas*,** that person becomes woeful coming-into-existence again. 

Unwholesome action which is the source of woeful process of newely occurrence of next existence called ***apāya paṭisandhi*** is called ***kamma bhava*.**Woeful aggregates which are produced by actions (***kammas*)** are called ***upapatti bhava*** (rebirth coming-into-existence). **(*Abhi-A-2-176-177, Vs-2-208*)** 

9. **Clinging-to-sensual desire and joyful coming-into-existence**  

Due  to  presence  of  intelligence  advanced  by  some  factors  such  as  listening  on ***dhammas*** preached by Noble Ones, the other person, fulfils wholesome ***dhammas***, bodily right deeds etc, through clinging-to-sensual desire with a way of reasoning that these kinds of sensual desire can be accomplished by this wholesome action. 

**Page-547** 

`            `Due to presence of wholesome deeds, that person has got ***paṭisandhi*** in either realm of heavenly being or realm of human being. The action which is the source of rebirth coming- into-existence of these heavenly being or human being is called ***kammabhava*.** Aggegates produced by action **(*kamma*),** are called ***upapattibhava*.** In this way the clinging-to-sensual desire  is  source  of  woeful  ***kammabhave,  upapattibhava*,**  jouful  ***kammabhava, upapattibhava*. *(Abhi-A-2-177, Vs-2-209)*.** 

10. **Clinging-to-sensual  desire  and  fine-material  coming-into-existence,  immaterial coming-into-existence.** 

Due to presence of attainments of absorptions **(*jhānasamāpatti*)** which are developed by means of strong clinging-to-sensual desire of fine material and immaterial sphere after hearing or considering in a way that “sensual desires of fine-material and immaterial sphere are more excellent than those of sensual sphere”, the other person has got ***paṭisandhi*** of either fine-material  sphere  or  immaterials  sphere.  The  actions  of  fine-material  sphere  and immaterial  sphere  which  are  source  of  ***upapattibhava***  in  those  fine  material  sphere  or immaterial  sphere  are  called  ***kammabhava*.**  Aggregates  which  are  produced  by  actions **(=*kammabhava*)**  are  called  ***upapattibhava*.**  In  this  way  the  clinging-to-sensual  desire  is source  of  fine-material  ***kammabhava***,  ***upapattibhava***,  immaterial  ***kammabhava***, ***upapattibhava***. **(*Abhi-A-2-177, Vs-2-209*)** 

11. **Clinging-to-wrong  views  and  sensual,  fine-material  immaterial  *kammabhava*, *upapattibhava*** 

After obsessing on wrong view of annihilation ***(ucchedadiṭṭi)*** in a way that "if this self-identity is annihilated in any kind of coming-into-existence either sensually completed coming-into-existence ***(kāmāvacara sampattibhava)*** or fine-material or immaterial coming- into-existence by chance, it is well annihilation", the other person endeavours various kinds of actions of sensual sphere, fine-material sphere and immaterial sphere which are capable of reaching into any kind of those coming-into-existence. The action ***(kamma)*** of that person is 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE45

called ***kammabhava***. Aggregates which are produced by action are called ***upapattibhava***. (it should be recognized these words are said with referring to foolish common persons who have  not  attain  knowledge  of  Analyzing  Mentality-Corporeality  and  Knowledge  of Discerning Cause and Condition.) In this way the clinging-to-wrong views is also source of three kinds of coming-into-existence called ***kāma-rūpa-arūpa (kammabhava***, ***uppattibhava)***. **(*Abhi-A-2-177, Vs-2-209*)** 

12. **How coming-into-existence occurs due to persenceof cling-to-self-opinion** 

Due to presence of clinging-to-self-opinion which considers that "this self-identity is great happiness and free from worries in any kind of coming-into-existence either sensual completed  coming-into-existence  of  fine-material  coming-into-existence  or  immaterial coming-into-existence, the other person endeavours various kinds of action of sensual sphere, fine-material sphere and immaterial sphere which are capable of reaching into any kind of those coming-into-existence. 

**Page-548** 

The action ***(kamma)*** of that person is called ***kammabhava***. Aggregates which are produced by action are called ***upapattibhava***. In this way clinging-to-self-opinion is source of sensual  ***kammabhava***,  ***upapattibhava***,  fine-material  ***kammabhava***,  ***upapattibhava***, immaterial ***kammabhava, upapattibhava***. **(Abhi-A-2-177, 178, Vs-2-209)** 

13. **How coming-into-existence occurs due to presence of clinging-to-rules & rites** 

The other person cultivates the action ***(kamma)*** which is capcable of reaching into any kind of coming-into-existence either sensually completed coming-into-existence or fine- material coming-into-existence or immaterial coming-into-existence by means of clinging-to- rules & rites through hearing or consideration in a way that "these rules and rites called practice of cattles, pratice of dogs can give rise to any kind of coming-into-existence either sensually  completed  coming-into-existence  or  fine-material  coming-into-existence  or immaterial  coming-into-existence".  That  action  of  that  person  is  called  ***kammabhava***. Aggregates which are produced by that action is called ***upapattibhava***. In this way clinging- to-rules  &  rites  is  also  source  of  sensual  ***kammabhava***,  ***upapattibhava***,  fine-material ***kammabhava***, ***upapattibhava***, immaterial ***kammabhava***, ***upapattibhava***. **(*Abhi-A-2-178, Vs- 2-209*)** 

The reason why clinging-to-rules & rites is explained as last one in this section of ***bhavaniddesa*** is that \_\_\_\_\_ firstly, clinging-to-rules & rites never arise frequently compared with cliging-to-self-opinion and the second, clinging-to-rules &  rites can arise depending upon clinging-to-self-opinion only. **(*Mūlaṭī-2-124*)** 

In the continuum of a person who has fulfilled Knowledge of Analysing Mentality & Corporeality and Knowledge of Discerning Cause & Condition these two kinds of clinging, ***sīlabbatapādāna*** and ***attavādupādāna***, are very far to arise again in this life. For previous very  long  rounds  of  rebirth,  actually,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  an  occurrence  with unexperienced to those kinds of clinging. In the continuum of a person who has not fulfilled these two kinds of knowledge, those ***kamma*** coming-into-existence and rebirth coming-into- existence had been occurred, occur, or will be occurred in three periods past, present and future accordingly, due to presence of all four kinds of clinging really. 
PAGE45
