PAGE47 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

3. Due to arising of nose-base-corporeality, smelling-consciousness mind-base arises. Nose- base-corporeality  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  smelling-consciousness  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Due  to  arising  of  tongue-base-corporeality,  tasting-consciousness  mind-base  arises. Tongue-base-corporeality is causal ***dhamma***; tasting-consciousness mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Due  to  arising  of  body-base-corporeality,  touching-consciousness  mind-base  arises. Body-base-corporeality is causal ***dhamma***; touching-consciousness mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Due to arising of heart-base-corporeality, “mind-element, mind-consciousness element”- consciousness  mind-base  arises.  Heart-base-corporeality  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  “mind- element, mind-consciousness element”-consciousness mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 

These ways of discerning can be performed as a whole. The mind-base called mind- element,  mind-consciousness-element  include  both  those  consciousness  freeing  from cognitive  process,  i.e.,  ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum  and  death-consciousness,  and  those consciousness  of  cognitive  processes,  i.e.,  five-doors-adverting,  receiving,  investigating, determining, impulsion, registering, mind-door-adverting, impulsion, registering. It is very wide field. If discerning knowledge is unable to discern those ultimate ***dhammas*** on the whole, separate discerning must be performed by dividing base and door (***āyatana, dvāra***) as follows. During discerning in that way, if associating mental concomitants are also discerned minglingly and the mind-base is discerned as priority, there will be no disadvantages. 

**PAGE-492** 

**The next method-way of separate discerning according to base-door (ayatanadvara)** 

1. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, ***paţisandhi*** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality** is causal ***dhamma***; ***paţisandhi*** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(In  this  case,  base-corporeality  benefits  ***paţisandhi***  mind-base  by  means  of  efficiency  of relations, compatibility etc. During life, however each depended base-corporeality benefits respective  mind-base  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of  base-pre-compatibility, dependence etc. During ***paţisandhi***, cause and result arise simultaneously but during life they arise asynchronously, the cause, base-corporeality arises beforehand.) 

2. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **life-continuum** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality**  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  **life-continuum**  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma*** 
2. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, ***cuti* (death*)*** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality** is causal ***dhamma***; ***cuti* (death)** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma*** 
2. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **five-doors-adverting** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality** is causal ***dhamma***; **five-doors-adverting** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma*** 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE47

5. Due to arising of **eye**, **seeing-consciousness** mind-base arises. 

**Eye** is causal ***dhamma***; **seeing-consciousness** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma*** 

6. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **receiving** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality** is causal ***dhamma***; **receiving** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma*** 
6. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **investigating** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality**  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  **investigating**  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma*** 
6. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **determining** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality**  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  **determining**  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma*** 
6. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **the first impulsion** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality** is causal ***dhamma***; **the first impulsion** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma*** 

(Seven times of impulsions must be discerned meticulously.) 

10. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **the first registering** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality** is causal ***dhamma***; **the first registering** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma*** 

(The second registering must also be discerned similarly.) 

11. Due to arising of **heart-base-corporeality**, **mind-door-adverting** mind-base arises. **Heart-base-corporeality**  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  **mind-door-adverting**  mind-base  is resultant ***dhamma*** 

The  life-continuum  existing  between  eye-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door cognitive process must be discerned as the life-continuum mentioned above. Those mind- moments,  impulsions  and  registerings,  which  are  consisting  in  the  mind-door  cognitive process, must also be discerned as impulsions and registering which are consisting in the eye- door-cognitive process. 

**PAGE-493** 

***Paţisandhi***  consciousness  arises  depending  on  the  heart-base-corporeality  which arises  simultaneously  with  it.  Death-consciousness  arises  depending  on  the  heart-base- corporeality which arose simultaneously with 17th mind-moment backward from it (counting is made including itself). Fivefold-consciousness, seeing-consciousness etc., arise depending on  the  respective  base-  corporealities,  eye-base  corporeality  with  middle-life  duration (***majjhimāyuka cakkhu vatthurūpa***) etc., which arise simultaneously with the life-continuum arisen just before life-continuum (past) called ***atītabhavanga***. During life, remaining life- continuum  and  all  consciousness  of  cognitive  process  called  mind-element,  mind- consciousness-element arise depending on respective heart-bases which arise simultaneously with  preceding  mind-moments  of  themselves.  For  instance\_\_\_\_  five-doors-adverting consciousness arises depending on the heart-base-corporeality which arises simultaneously with the life-continuum (interruption). This way of discerning is the same as the way of discerning, such as, “due to arising of base, feeling-aggregate arises; base is causal ***dhamma***; 
PAGE47
PAGE49 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

feeling-aggregate  is  resultant  ***dhamma***  etc.,”  found  in  the  fifth  method  of  dependent- origination.  

**(i) 4. Due to arising of matter, how corporeal bases arise** 

Four  kinds  of  great  elements,  within  eye-decad  benefit  the  eye-base  within  the  same corporeal unit by means of efficiency of relations of compatibility etc. Physical vitality within the same corporeal unit also benefits the eye-base by means of relations of controlling faculty etc. The nutriment produced by nutriment called ***kabaļīkāraāhāra*** also supports the nutriment within eye-decad and produces new  generations of corporeal units with the nutriment  as eighth  factor,  resulting  in  benefiting  for  eye-base  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of nutriment  etc.  It  should be  understood  on  remaining bases,  ear-base  etc,  in  similar  way. Afterwards causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing how each resultant ***dhamma*** arises, due to arising of respective causal ***dhamma***, as follows.— 

1. Due to arising of **Four kinds of great elements** within **eye**-decad, the **eye**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Four kinds of great elements** within **eye**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **eye**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due  to  arising  of  **Physical  vitality**  within  **eye**-decad,  the  **eye**-base  within  the  same corporeal unit arises. 

**Physical vitality** within **eye**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **eye**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

3. Due  to  arising  of  the  nutriment  which  is  present  in  **eye**-decad  (which  obtains  the supporting  factor  of  ***kabaļīkāra***  ***āhāra***),  **eye**-bases  of  both  the  same  and  different corporeal units arise. 

The nutriment, which is present in **eye**-decad, is causal ***dhamma***; **eye**-bases of both the same and different corporeal units are resultant ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-494** 

4. Due to arising of **Four kinds of great elements** within **ear**-decad, the **ear**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Four kinds of great elements** within **ear**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **ear**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

5. Due  to  arising  of  **physical  vitality**  within  **ear**-decad,  the  **ear**-base  within  the  same corporeal unit arises. 

**Physical vitality** within **ear**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **ear**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

6. Due  to  arising  of  the  nutriment  which  is  present  in  **ear**-decad  (which  obtains  the supporting  factor  of  ***kabaļīkāra***  ***āhāra***),  **ear**-bases  of  both  the  same  and  different corporeal units arise. 

5500 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

The nutriment, which is present in **ear**-decad, is causal ***dhamma***; **ear**-bases of both the same and different corporeal units are resultant ***dhammas***. 

7. Due to arising of **Four kinds of great elements** within **nose**-decad, the **nose**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Four kinds of great elements** within **nose**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **nose**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

8. Due to arising of **Physical vitality** within **nose**-decad, the **nose**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Physical vitality** within **nose**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **nose**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

9. Due  to  arising  of  the  nutriment  which  is  present  in  **nose**-decad  (which  obtains  the supporting  factor  of  ***kabaļīkāra***  ***āhāra***),  **nose**-bases  of  both  the  same  and  different corporeal units arise. 

The nutriment, which is present in **nose**-decad, is causal ***dhamma***; **nose**-bases of both the same and different corporeal units are resultant ***dhammas***. 

10. Due to arising of **Four kinds of great elements** within **tongue**-decad, the **tongue**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Four kinds of great elements** within **tongue**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **tongue**- base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

11. Due to arising of **Physical vitality** within **tongue**-decad, the **tongue**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Physical vitality** within **tongue**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **tongue**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

12. Due to arising of the nutriment which is present in **tongue**-decad (which obtains the supporting  factor  of ***kabaļīkāra***  ***āhāra***), **tongue**-bases  of both  the  same  and  different corporeal units arise. 

The nutriment, which is present in **tongue**-decad, is causal ***dhamma***; **tongue**-bases of both the same and different corporeal units are resultant ***dhammas***. 

13. Due to arising of **Four kinds of great elements** within **body**-decad, the **body**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Four kinds of great elements** within **body**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **body**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma***. 

14. Due to arising of **Physical vitality** within **body**-decad, the **body**-base within the same corporeal unit arises. 

**Physical vitality** within **body**-decad are causal ***dhammas***; the **body**-base within the same corporeal unit is resultant ***dhamma*** 

15. Due  to  arising  of  the  nutriment  which  is  present  in  **body**-decad  (which  obtains  the supporting  factor  of  ***kabaļīkāra***  ***āhāra***),  **body**-bases  of  both  the  same  and  different corporeal units arise. 

The nutriment, which is present in **body**-decad, is causal ***dhamma***; **body**-bases of both the same and different corporeal units are resultant ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-495** 

[**Notes:\_\_\_\_** Ingested nourishments, as a kind of bodily part in the stomach, are pure-octads with nutriment as eighth factor, which are produced by temperature. When the supporting factor of digestible five called ***pācaka tejo*** ***dhātu*** within vital nonads which are lying in the stomach, is available, those nutriments within pure-octads produced by temperature give rise to occur new generations of corporeal units with nutriment as eighth factor. Those nutriments consisting in new corporeal units with nutriment as eighth factor support the stability of various kinds of nutriments consisting incorporeal units produced by four origins, which are called ***kammaja ojā***,***cittaja ojā***, ***utuja ojā***, ***āhāraja ojā***. Due to presence of supporting in this way, those four kinds of nutriments consisting in various corporeal units, eye-decad etc., give rise  to  occur  new  generations  of  corporeal  units  with  nutriment  as  eighth  factor  again, resulting in durability and stability of corporeal bases, eye-base etc. The phenomenon how nutriment benefits corporeal bases must be discerned by seeing above nature with the help of penetrative knowledge. 

**(i) 5. Due to arising of mind-matter, how mind-base arises** 

According to the term, ***nāma*** (mind),three kinds of mental aggregates called mental concomitants  must  be  inferred.  According  to  the  term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  depended  base- corporeality, which are dependence of respective mental ***dhammas***, must be inferred. In five- groups-existence, those mind-matter benefit associating mind-base by means of efficiency of relations  of  compatibility,  mutuality,  dependence,  ***kamma***  consequence,  association, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. (***Abhi-A-2-167, Vs-2-199***) This way of discerning is the same as the way of discerning, such as, “due to arising of mind-matter, consciousness aggregate  arises;  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  consciousness  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***”  found  in  the  fifth  method  of  dependent-origination.  The  following  ways  of discerning must be performed by seeing the phenomenon, “due to arising of each mind- matter, how respective mind-base arise.” 

1. Due to arising of ***paţisandhi*** mind-matter, ***paţisandhi*** mind-base arises. 

***Paţisandhi*** mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; ***paţisandhi*** mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due to arising of life-continuum  mind-matter, life-continuum  mind-base arises. Life-continuum mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; life-continuum  mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Due to arising of death (***cuti***) mind-matter, death (***cuti***) mind-base arises. 

Death  (***cuti***)  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  death  (***cuti***)  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

[Note:\_\_\_\_  According  to  the  term,  base  (***vatthu***),  (6)  kinds  of  base-corporealities  are significant ones. However according to inevitable preaching methodology called ***avinābhava*** ***naya***, if those kinds of corporealities (54-44) etc, which are occurring together with various base-corporealities, heart-base etc, inside the heart, are also kept in mind minglingly with the purpose of breaking down each compactness called ***ghana*** and reaching into the field of the 

5522 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

ultimate nature, there will be no disadvantage. Thus during ***paţisandhi***, according to the term, mind,  (33)  mental  concomitants;  and  according  to  the  term,  matter,  (30)  kinds  of corporealities;  for  the  life-continuum  mind-moment,  the  term,  mind,  (33)  mental concomitants; and according to the term, matter, (54) kinds of corporealities can be inferred respectively. It should be understood similarly for every mind-moment.] 

PAGE-496 

4. Due  to  arising  of  five-doors-adverting  mind-matter,  five-doors-adverting  mind-base arises. 

Five-doors-adverting mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; five-doors-adverting mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 

[Mind  =  (10)  kinds  of  mental  concomitants;  matter  =  (54)  kinds  of  corporealities including heart-base, which arise simultaneously with life-continuum (interruption).] 

5. Due  to  arising  of  seeing-consciousness  mind-matter,  seeing-consciousness  mind-base arises. 

Seeing-consciousness mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; seeing-consciousness mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 

[mind = (7) kinds of mental concomitants; matter = (54) kinds of corporealities including eye-base-corporeality which arise simultaneously with one mind-moment before past life- continuum (***atītabhavanga***)] 

6. Due to arising of receiving mind-matter, receiving mind-base arises. Receiving mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; receiving mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. [Mind = (7) kinds of mental concomitants; matter = (54) kinds of corporealities including heart-base, which arise simultaneously with seeing-consciousness (interruption).] 
6. Due to arising of investigating mind-matter, investigating mind-base arises. Investigating  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  investigating  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Due to arising of determining mind-matter, determining mind-base arises. Determining  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  determining  mind-base  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Due to arising of the first impulsion mind-matter, the first impulsion mind-base arises. The first impulsion mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; the first impulsion mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. (7-times of impulsions must be discerned.) 
6. Due to arising of the first registering mind-matter, the first registering mind-base arises. The first registering mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; the first registering mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. (The second registering must also be discerned similarly.) 
6. Due  to  arising  of  mind-door-adverting  mind-matter,  mind-door-adverting  mind-base arises. 

Mind-door-adverting mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; mind-door-adverting mind-base is resultant ***dhamma***. 

[Notes:\_\_\_\_  Those  impulsions  and  registering  mind-moments  consisting  in  mind-door- cognitive process must be discerned similarly as shown in eye-door-cognitive process. As shown in Tables of ***nāmakammaţţhāna***, every mind-moment consisting in each row must be discerned thoroughly. Both wholesome and unwholesome groups for all (6) lines must be discerned  thoroughly.  Those  mind-moments,  i.e.,  five-doors-adverting,  determining, impulsions, and mind-door-adverting ought to be discerned minglingly with the intention not to remain any ultimate element.] 

**PAGE-497** 

**2.8.  *Salayatanapaccaya phasso***  

**Due to arising of six-bases, contact arises** 

1. ***Phassa*  (contact)**  –  There  are  (6)  kinds  of  contacts  in  brief,  viz.,  eye-contact (***cakkhusamphassa***), ear-contact (***sotasamphassa***), nose-contact (***ghānasamphassa***), tongue- contact (***jihvāsamphassa***), body-contact (***kāyasamphassa***), mind-contact (***manosamphassa***). There are (32) kinds of contacts which associate with (32) kinds of mundane consequence consciousness  in  detail.  It  means  those  are  contacts  associating  with  consciousness  of ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum,  death,  fivefold-consciousness,  receiving,  investigating, registering. (***Abhi-A-2-168, Vs-2-199***) 

***Saļāyatana* (six bases)---** There are two kinds of inferring the basic meaning of six bases which are causal ***dhammas*** of those contacts. These are the method which infers (6) kinds of internal bases (***ajjhattikāyatana***) only, the eye-base etc., and the next one which infers both those (6) kinds of internal bases and (6) kinds of external bases (***bāhirayatana***) called  the  sight-base  (***rūpāyatana***),  the  sound-base  (***saddāyatana***),  the  odour-base (***gandhāytana***),  the  flavour-base  (***rasāyatana***),  the  touch-base  (***phoţţabbāyatana***),  the ideational-base (***dhammāyatana***). 

2. **The first method\_\_\_\_\_** Those wise person who prefer the first method of inferring said as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

This  section  of  preaching  on  dependent-origination  is,  actually, ***upādinnakapavattikathā*** = the preaching showing how causal relationship of all corporeality- mentality,  which  are  existing  in  the  continuity  of  living  aggregates,  occurs  successively. Those noble teachers, therefore, showed both causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** which are inclusive in the continuity of internal corporeality-mentality of oneself only (***sakasantati pariyāpannameva,  Vs-2-199***)  =  a  single  continuity  of  internal  corporeality-mentality (***ekasantati pariyāpannameva***) only. Six bases called internal bases only are desired to be inferred  as  ***saļāyatana***.  With  referring  to  the  ***Pāli  Text***,  ***chaţţhāyatana  paccayā  phasso, (Abhi-2-187)*** = due to arising of the sixth base called mind-base, contact arises, those wise persons preferred to infer in a way that – in the Immaterial Sphere, the mind-base which is the  sixth  base,  and  in  the  five-groups-existence  six  bases  benefit  contact  through indiscriminate inferring all kinds of bases, with the result that (6) kinds of internal bases called the sixth base, mind-base together with eye-base etc, are desired to be inferred as ***saļāyatana***  after  performing  partial  cancellation  of  words  (***ekadesasarūpekasesa***)  as “***chaţţhāyatanañca*** ***saļāyatanañca saļāyatanam***”. It is right.\_\_\_\_\_ Those internal base are worth  designating  as  ***saļāyatana***  in  accordance  with  partial  cancellation  of  words, “***chaţţhāyatanañca saļāyatanañca saļāyatañam.” (Abhi-A-2-168, Vs-2- 199)*** 

5544 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

3. **The second method \_\_\_\_\_** Such wise and virtuous persons, actually, showed only** the resultant contact is inclusive in a single continuity of corporeality-mentality, and aggregates, The causal ***dhamma***, six bases, however, is shown as two kinds, viz., the ***dhamma*** which is inclusive in a single continuity of corporeality-mentality (***ekasantatipariyāpanna***) and the ***dhamma*** with different continuum (***binna santāna***). Such such base benefits for arising of contact, all kinds of base which benefit for arising of that contact are desired to be shown and then those wise and virtuous persons, actually, desired indiscriminately in a way that those 

(6) kinds of internal bases, the eye-base etc, together with (6) kinds of external bases, the sight-base etc, are inferred as ***saļāyatana***. 

**PAGE-498** 

It  is  right.\_\_\_\_\_  If  cancellation  of  the  words  is  performed  through  double  saying (***dvannavacanattha***)  as  ***chaţţhāyatanañca***  ***saļāyatanañca***  ***saļāyatanañca***   ***saļāyatanam***, those ***dhammas***, the sixth mind-base, (6) kinds of internal bases, (6) kinds of external bases, are worth designating as ***saļāyatana***. (***Abhi-A-2-168, Vs-2-199, 200***) 

**In the first opinion of teachers\_\_\_\_\_** with regarding to the term, ***ajjhatta*** (internal), (6)  kinds  of  internal  bases  only,  eye-base  etc.,  which  are  inclusive  in  the  continuity  of corporeality-mentality of oneself, must be inferred as ***saļāyatana***. It is right. – Only those bases  which  are  inclusive  in  the  continuity  of  corporeality-mentality  of  oneself  and  are produced by previous  action  (***kamma***), benefit  the  contact,  which  is  worth  discerning  in similar way, which is inclusive in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of oneself and are produced by previous  action.  Furthermore, in the aspect of those external bases, visible- object  etc.,  actually,  not  only  the  visible-object  which  is  inclusive  in  the  continuity,  of corporeality-mentality  of  oneself  but  also  those  visible-objects  which  are  inclusive  in continuity of corporeality-mentality of others and external non-living visible-objects also can occur as the relation of object for arising of contact: Those external living and non-living visible-objects are not the causal ***dhammas*** of contact through the occurrence in which those are  produced  by  action-defilement  which  are  inclusive  in  the  continuity  of  corporeality mentality of oneself as internal bases, eye-base etc. (It means those external bases, external living  and  non-living  visible-objects  etc.,  also  have  respective  causal  ***dhammas***  and  the former  arise  due  to  the  latter  only.)  Therefore  those  external  bases  are  not  inferred  as ***saļāyatana*** in the first opinion of teachers. (***Mūlaţī***-***2-119, Mahāţī-2-323***) 

**In the second opinion of teachers\_\_\_\_\_** if any kind of external bases which may be whatever kind, it may be inclusive in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of oneself or others; it may be external living or non-living ones; can benefit for arising of contact through the relation of object, it is impossible to avoid to designate as non-related ***dhamma***. It should, therefore,  be  recognized  external  bases  are  also  inferred  as  ***saļāyatana***.  (***Mūlaţī***-***2-119, Mahāţī-2-323***) 

4. **The Opinion of noble teachers who stay in *Mahāvihāra* Monastery  *Pāli Quotation* (*Mahāţī*-*2-323*)** 

According to the opinion of noble teachers who stayed in ***Mahāvihāra*** Monastery, as the  consequence  consciousness  only  must  be  inferred  as  the  consciousness  produced  by formation,  similarly,  among  those  factors  of  dependent-origination  called  (consciousness) mind-matter,  six  base,  contact,  feeling,  they  wanted  to  infer  only  consequence  round ***dhammas***  by  showing  only  the  ***dhammas***  which  are  inclusive  in  the  continuity  of corporeality-mentality of oneself for both sides of causality and result. (***Mahāţī***-***2-323***) 

**PAGE-499** 

5. **The way of preaching as *phasso* which is singular noun**  
1. Due to all kinds of bases, a single contact never arise. 
1. Due to a single kind of bases, all kinds of contacts never arise 
1. Actually – due to many kinds of bases a single contact can arise. 

For instance—Due to these (4) kinds of bases,viz., (1) the eye-base (2) the sight-base (3) seeing-consciousness  =  the  mind-base  (4)  associating  ideational-base  called  six  kinds  of associating  mental  concomitants,  excluding  contact  (=  6  kinds  of  mental  concomitants resulting from subtraction of contact from “7” kinds of mental concomitants which associate all  consciousness),  the  eye-contact  (***cakkhu-samphassa***)  arises.  Similarly  all  kinds  of contacts should be yoked together accordingly. (***Abhi-A-2-168, Vs-2-200***) 

Because of a single contact can arise through many kinds of bases in that way, the Supreme Buddha with nobility called ***tādi*** (= the quality of patience forbearance which resists resolutely to (8) kinds of natural ***dhammas***, blame or praise etc, which is possessed by the Arahant only), had been shown and preached in a way that a single contact has got many factors called bases by directing the postpositional  marker with singular as ***phasso*** in this ***Pāli Text***, “***saļāyatanapaccaya*** ***phasso***”. (***Abhi-A-2-169, Vs-2-200***) 

[**Notice**:\_\_\_\_\_ It is explained merely how a single kind of contact, eye-contact etc., can arise through many causal ***dhammas***. It should not be misunderstood that contact only, eye-contact  etc.,  can  arise  without  associating  ***dhammas***.  The  fact,  "those  associating ***dhammas*** lie in the side of causal ***dhammas***”, is the noticeable one.] 

6. **Conditional relations** 
1. Five kinds of corporeal bases, eye-base etc, benefit (5) kinds of each contacts, eye-contact etc, by means of efficiency of (6) kinds of relations, viz., dependence, pre-compatibility, controlling-faculty, dissociation, presence, non-disappearance. 
1. Consequence mind-bases benefit various kind of consequence mind-contacts of receiving, investigating within (6) kinds of cognitive processes, eye-door-cognitive process etc., by means of efficiency of (9) kinds of relations, viz., compatibility, mutuality, dependence, ***kamma***-consequence,  nutriment,  controlling  faculty,  association,  presence,  non- disappearance. 
1. Among external bases, the sight-base benefits the eye-contact by means of efficiency of 

   4) kinds  of  relations,  viz.,  object,  pre-compatibility,  presence,  non-disappearance.  It should be recognized similarly on remaining external bases, sound-base etc. 
4. Both  sight-base,  sound-base,  odour-base,  flavour-base,  touch-base,  which  are  still reaching  into  the  present  three-time-phases  and  real  corporealities  called  the  water- element, sex-corporeality, physical vitality, heart-base, nutriment, which are inclusive in the  ideational-base  and  are  reaching  into  the present  three-time-phases, benefit  mind- contact by means of efficiency of (4) kinds of relations, viz., object, pre-compatibility, presence, non-disappearance.  

5566 \* **NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ** (Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw)

**PAGE-500** 

5. Both above (6) kinds of external bases which are not reaching into the present three-time- phases  but  past  and  future  ones,  non-real  corporealities  which  are  inclusive  in  the ideational-base and and ***nibbāna***, concept (pannatti), which are free from three periods, benefit mind-contact by means of efficiency of relation of object only. (***Abhi-A-***2-169, Vs-2-200, 201, ***Mahāţī***-2-324) 

**To be recognized in advance**\_\_\_\_\_ Each contact has got (4) kinds of causal ***dhammas***, viz., (1) depended base-corporeality (2) object (3) associating consciousness called mind-base (4) associating mental concomitants called ideational-base. Among depended corporealities, the eye-base for ***cakkhu vatthu***, the ear-base for ***sotavatthu***, the nose-base for ***ghānavatthu***, the tongue-base  for  ***jihvāvatthu***,  the  body-base  for  ***kāyavatthu***,  the  ideational-base  for ***hadayavatthu*** are depended corporealities (***vatthurūpa***) respectively. Six kinds of objects are (6) kinds of external bases. 

The  resultant  contact  and  associating  consciousness  are  mind-base,  while  every associating mental concomitant is associating ideational-base. 

In this case, those sharp wisdom persons can discern (6) kinds of contacts separately. However the mind-contact concerns with enormous field, resulting in difficulty to discern on a whole. Therefore it can be clear understood by dividing base-door and each mind-moment and separate discerning on each base-door and each mind-moment. It will be presented on separate discerning on each base-door and each mind-moment as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

7. **Way of keeping in mind causal and resultant *dhammas*** 

**A. How *paţisandhi* mind-contact arises** 

1. Due to arising of the “heart-base (= ideational-base)”, ***paţisandhi*** mind-contact arises. The  “heart-base  (=  ideational-base)”  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  ***paţisandhi***  mind-contact  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the “***kamma***-object (= ideational-base)”, ***paţisandhi*** mind-contact arises. The “***kamma***-object (= ideational-base)” is causal ***dhamma***; ***paţisandhi*** mind-contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the “***paţisandhi***-consciousness (= mind-base)”, ***paţisandhi*** mind-contact arises. The  “***paţisandhi***-consciousness  (=  mind-base)”  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  ***paţisandhi***  mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of the “(32) kinds of associating ideational-base”, ***paţisandhi*** mind-contact arises. 

The  “(32)  kinds  of  associating  ideational-base”  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  ***paţisandhi***  mind- contact is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Kamma-object\_\_\_\_\_** The object of mental ***dhammas*** of ***paţisandhi*** is any one of three  kinds  of  objects,  ***kamma***-emblem  of  action-emblem  of  destination  which  had been taken  as  object  by  impulsions  of  near  death  of  adjacent  past  life.  Those  three  kinds  of emblems  might  be  (6)  kinds  of  objects  accordingly.  In  this  case  the  ***kamma***-object  is presented as example. For a righteous ***meditator*** if that object was experienced as ***kamma***- object, it was the wholesome volition called sensual wholesome formation. That wholesome volition is an ideational-object really. 

**PAGE-501** 

