***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAŢIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 251 - 300** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN ÑĀ*ŅAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE-251** 

**Further explanation** \_\_\_\_\_ 

Because  ***paţisandhi***  feeling  aggregate  is  inclusive  in  the  consequence  mental ***dhammas***,  it  arises  due  to  presence  of  both  past  causal  ***dhammas***  and  present  causal ***dhammas***, base-object-contact etc. The phenomenon of arising of feeling aggregate, due to presence of (5) kinds of past causal ***dhammas*** can easily understood and then it will be presented  further  explanation  on  phenomenon  of  arising,  due  to  present  causal ***dhammas***.\_\_\_\_\_ 

***vatthu*** (base) \_\_\_\_\_ That mental ***dhamma*** called feeling, in other words, the feeling together  with  all  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  ***paţisandhi***  are  able  to  arise  only  when depended  base  corporeality  is  present  in  the  five-groups-existence  really.  That  feeling together with all kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of ***paţisandhi*** arise depending on the heart-base (***hadayavatthu***)  which  arises  simultaneously  with  those  mental  ***dhammas***.  These  mental ***dhammas***  are  unable  to  arise  without  depending  on  that  heart-base.  By  seeing  this phenomenon with the help of insight causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to arising of base-corporeality, ***paţisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Base-corporeality  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  ***paţisandhi***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

In five-group-existence those kinds of mind consciousness, the first life-continuum adjacent  to  ***paţisandhi***  etc,  depends  on  the  heart-base  which  arises  simultaneously  with previous contiguous consciousness. When those Noble Fruit consciousness of Non-returnee and Arahant emerge from the Cessation-absorption (***nirodha samāpatti***), they depend on the heart-base which arises simultaneously with previous contiguous consciousness. In the period adjacent to death those kinds of mind-consciousness, life-continuum, advertence etc, depend on the heart-base which arises simultaneously with the 17th mind moment counted backward from  death-consciousness.  Fivefold  consciousness  depend  on  respective  fivefold  clear sensitivities (***pañcapasāda***) with middle life-span, which arise simultaneously with the past life-continuum (***atītabhavanga***). 

**Way of inferring the basic meaning of ‘*vatthu’* *Pāli Quotatin(Paţţhāna-1-5)*** 

1. Eye-base  benefits  both  seeing-consciousness  element  and  associating  mental concomitants by means of efficiency of relation of dependence. 
1. Ear-base  benefits  both  hearing-consciousness  element  and  associating  mental concomitants by means of efficiency of relation of dependence. 
1. Nose-base  benefits  both  smelling-consciousness  element  and  associating  mental concomitants by means of efficiency of relation of dependence. 
1. Tongue-base  benefits  both  tasting-consciousness  element  and  associating  mental concomitants by means of efficiency of relation of dependence. 
1. Body-base  benefits  both  touching-consciousness  element  and  associating  mental concomitants by means of efficiency of relation of dependence. 

**PAGE-252** 

6. Either the mind-element or the mind-consciousness-element arises depending on such heart-base; that heart-base benefits either mind-element or mind-consciousness-element 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

and their restective associating mental concomitants by means of efficiency of relation of dependence. 

(***Abhi-8-5***) 

According  toe  preaching  methodology  of  ***Abhidhamma***,  those  pure  base- corporealities,  eye-base,  ear-base,  nose-base,  tongue-base,  body-base,  heart-base,  are  the basic meaning of ***vatthu***. It is because each consciousness element and associating mental concomitants arises depending on respective base. In the aspect of preaching methodoly of ***Suttanta***, however, the term, ***vatthu***, must be inferred as not only those base-corporealities, eye-base etc, but also corporealities within the same corporeal unit, which are inevitable to be discerned, and underived, derived corporealities lying in various doors, eye etc. This way of inferring is instructed in commentaries as follows.\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-281)*** 

With referring to ***Sāmaññaphala Sutta*** and ***Mahāsakuludāyi Sutta***, commentaries determine to infer the basic meaning of depended base-corporealities for respective mental ***dhammas*** led by ***phassapañcamaka*** (= contact together with five mental ***dhammas***) as all kinds  of  underived  and  derived  corporealities  called  ***karajakāya***.  As  shown  in  tables  of ***rūpakammaţţhāna,  Volume  I***,  (54)  or  (44)  kinds  of  corporealities  must  be  inferred accordingly. 

If one considers in the aspect of nature, corporealities always arise as a group called ***Kalāpa*** (= corporeal unit) as natural fixed law. 

Pure base-corporealities,  eye-clear-sensitivity  (=  eye-base)  etc,  are  unable  to  arise singly. The practising ***meditator*** must also keep in mind all kinds of corporealities, (54), (44) etc, minglingly in order to reach the ultimate nature after breaking down each compactness of corporeality and mentality. 

During  arising  phase  of  ***paţisandhi***,  according  to  the  term,  ***vatthu***,  (30)  kinds  of corporealities are shown because (3) kinds of corporal units produced by ***kamma***, (30) kinds of  corporealities  begin  to  arise  at  that  instant.  If  it  is  the  heart-base  occurring  during practising now, there are (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart as shown in tables of ***rūpakammaţţhāna***. 

**PAGE-253** 

**Door (*dvāra*) and base (*vatthu*)** 

***tattha  cakkhādīni  chadvārāni,  rūpādīni  cha  ārammaņāni  nāmassa  sādhāraņo paccayo. (Vs-2-234)*** 

Because it is explained that (6) kinds of doors and (6) kinds of objects are causal ***dhammas*** having dealings with all mental ***dhammas***, it will be presented on explanation relating to the usage of door (***dvāra***) and base (***vatthu***). 

1. The basic meaning of eye-door and eye-base is the eye-clear sensitivity. 
1. The basic meaning of ear-door and ear-base is the ear-clear sensitivity. 
1. The basic meaning of nose-door and nose-base is the nose-clear sensitivity. 
1. The basic meaning of tongue-door and tongue-base is the tongue-clear sensitivity. 
1. The basic meaning of body-door and body-base is the body-clear sensitivity. 
PAGE3

Because each basic meaning of these (5) kinds of doors and (5) kinds of bases are the same in the basic  meaning respectively, each usage of either door or base has the same meaning. However the basic meanings of the mind-door and the heart-base are different from each other, but are the same in metaphorical usage called ***upacāra***. As mentioned in previous section, ***nāmakammaţţhāna, Volume II***, these terms, 

1. life-continuum is called mind-door 
1. consciousness of life-continuum together with mind-door adverting are also called mind- door. 
1. heart-base is also called mind-door through metaphorical usage called ***ţhānūpacāra*** (the name  of  place  is  designated  as  mind-door  which  is  actually  the  name  of  dweller, consciousness). 

Life-continuum  and  adverting  are  origin  of  consciousness  of  cognitive  process, resulting  in  designation  as  mind-door.  Heart-base  has  also  get  designation  as  mind-door through  metaphorical  usage  called  ***ţhānūpacāra***  because  it  is  depended  base  of  mind- element, mind-consciousness element, and associating  mental ***dhammas***. 

In the aspect of preaching methodology of ***Abhidhamma***, the basic meaning of heart- base  is  only  heart-base  corporeality  which  is  dependence  of  mind-element  and  mind- consciousness-element.  In  the  aspect  of  preaching  methodology  of  ***Suttanta***,  the  basic meaning of heart-base are the heart-base corporeality together with underived and derived corporealities. Therefore mind-door and heart-base have different basic meanings. 

If  the  mind-door  is  inferred  as  causal  ***dhamma***  of  ***paţisandhi***  feeling  aggregate together with all kinds of associating mental ***dhammas***, there is no mind-door previous to ***paţisandhi*** in this life. Actually those life-continuums called mind-door arise as the first life- continuum just after ***paţisandhi***. 

Furthermore if only the mind-door is considered as causal ***dhamma*** of mentality of cognitive process, other than ***paţisandhi***, and the heart base is omitted, that way of discerning can be incomplete. In the noble preaching of ***Paţţhāna*** the Supreme Buddha preached that the heart-base is also the relation of dependence for the mind-element and mind-consciousness element and then the heart-base should not be left out from causal ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-254** 

Therefore  both  kinds  of  heart-base  and  mind-door  are  shown  as  present  causal ***dhammas*** in appropriate section in this work. During ***paţisandhi***, depended base-corporeality only is shown as present causal ***dhamma*** due to inability to benefit by the life-continuum mind-door. The object is also the relation of object for arising of mind-element and mind- consciousness-element. In the commentary of ***Anupada Sutta (M-A-4-60)*** it is explained that only when both kinds of base and object are kept in mind by attaching together, mental ***dhammas*** can be discerned systematically. This way of discerning is an olden example of discerning accomplished by the most Venerable Sariputta. 

**Object**  (***āramaņa***)  \_\_\_\_\_  The  object  is  also  the  relation  of  object  for  arising  of  mental ***dhammas***,  resulting  in  a  significant  factor  for  mental  ***dhammas***.  There  are  (6)  kinds  of objects  and  the  relation  of  object  for  the  eye-door  cognitive  process  and  the  mind-door cognitive process, which take visible-object as object is visible-object and so forth. 

The  relation  of  object  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  ***paţisandhi***  and  life-continuum  of present  life  is  the  object  which  had  taken  as  object  by  impulsions  adjacent  to  death  in previous life. Although it can be any kind of three objects called ***kamma-kamma nimitta- gatinimitta*** (= action-emblem of action-emblem of destination), these object can be varied 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE66

among  different  persons.  If  kinds  of  object  among  action-emblem  of  action-emblem  of destination are varied, it can be significant difference in different persons. However in the continuity  of  corporeality-mentality  of  a ***meditator***  objects  of ***paţisandhi***,  life-continuum, death-consciousness within one life is only one kind of those three objects. Way of discerning mentioned above shows only object of ***kamma*** ordinarily. Those objects of ***kamma*** may also be varied such as rice  offering object of ***kamma***, flower offering object of ***kamma***. The practising ***meditator*** has to discern the object which had experienced in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of the period adjacent to death. 

The action of offering produces good returns for some ***meditators*** while the action of morality or the action of practice of ***samatha vipassanā*** produces good returns for some ***meditators***. Then actions of offering can be varied, such as rice offering, robe offering etc. Actions of morality can be varied, such as five-precepts, eight-precepts, ten-precepts etc. 

The actions of practice can also be varied such as action of ***kasina***-object action of practice on corpse, action of concentration of mindfulness of breathing, action of loving- kindness practice, action of ***vipassanā*** practice etc. Due to variations in objects of action in that  way,  those  objects  of  impulsions  adjacent  to  death  of previous  life  and ***paţisandhi- bhavanga-cuti*** of present life can be varied. When object of mental ***dhammas*** of ***paţisandhi*** of present-life can be kept in mind systematically, causes and results must be kept in mind as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

**PAGE-255** 

Due to arising of object, ***paţisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Object is causal ***dhamma***; ***paţisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Contact**  (***phassa***)  \_\_\_\_\_  The  reason  why  the  Supreme  Buddha  preached  in  a  way  that “***phassasamudayā vedanāsamudayo*** = due to arising of contact, feeling arises,” is that\_\_\_\_\_ the contact is a significant factor and then it was preached as priority through the preaching methodology  called  ***padhāna  naya***  (significant  method).  Because  four  mental  aggregates benefit mutually each other and if any kind of mental aggregates is inferred as resultant ***dhamma***, remaining ones lie in the side of causal ***dhammas***. In above way of discerning, because ***paţisandhi*** feeling aggregate lies in the side of resultant ***dhamma***, remaining (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** (**34 - feeling = 33**) lie in the side of causal ***dhammas***. Among those  causal  ***dhammas***,  the  contact  is  a  significant  factor  for  arising  of  feeling.  Mental ***dhammas*** benefit each other by means of efficiency of relations of compatibility, mutuality, dependence etc, as mutual reliance. As the flavor of a food becomes better and better when the food is masticated over and over, it the contact consisting in the same mind moment or different succeeding mind moments joins together with object, the feeling can feel the taste of object thoroughly. Thus, due to occurrence of significant factor of the contact, the Supreme Buddha preached that “due to arising of contact, feeling arises”. 

However contact is unable to arise only one itself. Only when remaining associating mental ***dhammas*** benefit contact by means of efficiency of relation of compatibility etc, the contact together with associating mental ***dhammas*** can arise simultaneously. Therefore it should be recognized the fact if contact only is said as causal ***dhamma***, remaining associating mental ***dhammas*** are also inclusive in causal ***dhammas***. 

Similarly only when the contact can join together with object, the perception (***saññā***) can bear in mind that object well; the volition can exhort associating ***dhammas*** in order to reach  on  the  object;  the  consciousness  can  also  realize  that  object  well.  By  seeing  the phenomenon of arising of feeling in this way the ***meditator*** must keep in mind causes and results as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 
PAGE5

Due to arising of contact (34-feeling-33), ***paţisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. Contact is the causal ***dhamma***; ***paţisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. It should be understood similarly on remaining mental aggregates. 

**PAGE-256** 

**C. *paţisandhi* perception aggregate Five kinds of past causal *dhammas*** 

1. Due to arising of ignorance (=20), ***paţisandhi*** perception aggregate arises. 

ignorance  (=20)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  perception  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due to arising of craving (=20), ***paţisandhi*** perception aggregate arises. 

Craving (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

3. Due to arising of clinging (=20), ***paţisandhi*** perception aggregate arises. 

Clinging (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

4. Due to arising of formation (=34), ***paţisandhi*** perception aggregate arises. 

Formation  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  perception  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

5. Due to arising of efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34), ***paţisandhi*** perception aggregate arises. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  perception  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

6. Due  to  arising  of  base  (=depended  base  corporeality,  30),  ***paţisandhi***  perception aggregate arises. 

Base  (=depended  base  corporeality,  30)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

7. Due to arising of object (=***kamma*** object), ***paţisandhi*** perception aggregate arises. 

Object (=***kamma*** object) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

8. Due  to  arising  of  contact  (=  34  – perception  =  33), ***paţisandhi*** perception  aggregate arises. 

Contact (= 34 – perception = 33) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**D(i) *paţisandhi* formation aggregate (first method)** 

**(volition must be inferred as formation)** 

1. Due to arising of ignorance (=20), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Ignorance (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due to arising of craving (=20), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Craving (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

3. Due to arising of clinging (=20), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Clinging (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

4. Due to arising of formation (=34), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Formation  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  formation  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

5. Due to arising of efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  formation  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE88

6. Due to arising of base (=depended base corporeality, 30), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Base  (=depended  base  corporeality,  30)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

7. Due to arising of object (=***kamma*** object), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Object (=***kamma*** object) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

8. Due to arising of contact (= 34 – volition = 33), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. Contact (= 34 – volition = 33) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-257** 

[**Notes**:\_\_\_\_\_  In this way of discerning,  according to the term formation aggregate, it is inferred as the volition only. This is the first method.] 

**D(ii) *paţisandhi* formation aggregate (second method)** 

**(31 kinds of mental concomitants must be inferred)** 

1. Due to arising of ignorance (=20), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Ignorance (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due to arising of craving (=20), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Craving (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

3. Due to arising of clinging (=20), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Clinging (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

4. Due to arising of formation (=34), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Formation  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  formation  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

5. Due to arising of efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  formation  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

6. Due to arising of base (=depended base corporeality, 30), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Base  (=depended  base  corporeality,  30)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

7. Due to arising of object (=***kamma*** object), ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. 

Object (=***kamma*** object) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

8. Due to arising of remaining (3) mental aggregate, ***paţisandhi*** formation aggregate arises. Remaining (3) mental aggregate are causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-258** 

[**Note**  :\_\_\_\_\_  Among  (34)  mental  ***dhammas***  of  ***paţisandhi***,  (31)  kinds  of  mental concomitants  led  by  contact-volition,  excluding  feeling-perception-consciousness  must  be inferred  as  formation  aggregate.  That  formation  aggregate  lies  in  the  side  of  resultant ***dhammas***. The present and proximate causes of that formation aggregate are remaining (3) mental  aggregate  according  to  explanation,  “***sesa-khandhattaa  padaţţhānā***”,  found  in commentaries. This way of discerning is intended to discern all kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of 
PAGE7

formation aggregate together with contact thoroughly. It should be recognized similarly on later sections.] 

**E. *paţisandhi* consciousness aggregate** 

1. Due to arising of ignorance (=20), ***paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate arises. Ignorance  (=20)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  consciousness  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of craving (=20), ***paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate arises. Craving  (=20)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  consciousness  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of clinging (=20), ***paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate arises. Clinging  (=20)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paţisandhi***  consciousness  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of consciousness (=34), ***paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate arises. Consciousness (=34) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34), ***paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate arises. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34) is causal ***dhamma; paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**One kind of present causal dhamma.** 

6. Due to arising of mind-matter, ***paţisandhi*** consciousness aggregate arises. 

Mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas;  paţisandhi***  consciousness  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-259** 

Further explanation \_\_\_\_\_ The term, mind (***nāma***), means group of mental concomitants led by  contact-volition  which  arise  simultaneously  with  consciousness  in  the  same  mind- moment.  It,  therefore,  is  similar  to  contact  which  is  said  as  causal  ***dhamma***.  During ***paţisandhi***, that term, mind, means (33) mental concomitants of ***paţisandhi***. If the ***meditator*** had got ***paţisandhi*** with neutrality feeling, numbers of mental ***dhammas*** are (32) because of lack  of  pleasurable  interest  called  ***pīti***.  The  term,  matter  (***rūpa***),  means  depended  base corporeality and object-corporeality. 

The Supreme Buddha preached that “***nāmaruūpa samudyā viññāņa samudayo (Sam- 2-50)*** = due to arising of mind-matter, consciousness arises” in the section of present causal ***dhammas*** of consciousness-aggregate. Then commentary explains a follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

***nāmanti ārammaņābhimukkham namanato vedanādayo tayo khandhā.*** 

***Rūpanti cattārimahābhūtāni catunnañca mahā-bhūtānam upādāyarūpam. (Vs-2-***

***192)*** 

The  term,  ***nāma***  (mind),  means  mental  concomitants  called  feeling  aggregate, perception aggregate, formation aggregate, due to ability to bend toward object. The term, ***rūpa*** (matter) means four great elements and derived corporealities which arise depending upon four great elements. Those are depended base-corporeality and object-corporeality. 

In  the  corporeal  group  depended  base-corporeal  and  object-corporeality  included, resulting in consisting two causal ***dhammas***, base and object. In the mental group the contact includes in formation aggregate, resulting in consisting of the causal ***dhamma*** called contact (***phassa***). It should, therefore, be recognized the fact the preaching that “mind-matter are 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE10

causal ***dhammas*** of consciousness aggregate” and the preaching that “base, object, contact are causal ***dhammas*** of consciousness aggregate” are no difference in the basic meaning. 

In above example it is shown that the object of ***paţisandhi*** is ***kamma***-object. That ***kamma***-object, if it is said for present life, is the wholesome volition cultivated in previous life. It is ideational-object (***dhammārammaņa***) but not corporeal ***dhamma***. If it is emblem of destination (***gatinimitta***), it is visible object and corporeal ***dhamma***.  If it is emblem of action, it may be (6) kinds of objects appropriately. It also includes object-corporeality. 

Due to including of all mental concomitants in the term, ***nāma***, the meaning, how all kinds  of  mental  concomitants  benefit  consciousness  intended  to  be  understood,  is  very obvious. Furthermore it should be recognized mutual relation between consciousness and mental  concomitants  is  also  intended  to  be  understood  more  clearly.  As  the  way  of discerning, “***viññāņa paccayā nāmarūpam*** =due to arising of consciousness, mind-matter arise”  was  preached  and  then  the  way  of  discerning,  “***nāmarūpa  samudayā  viññāņa samudayo*** = due to arising of mind-matter, consciousness arises”, was also intended to be discerned. This way of discerning give rise to obvious understanding on the preaching of ***Paţţhāna***, i.e., “four kinds of mental aggregates benefit each other mutually”. 

According to these explanations, it should be understood the fact the usage of causal ***dhammas***, base, object, contact and mind-matter are the same in essence of ultimate elements but those are varied in terminology only. 

**PAGE-260** 

By seeing the phenomenon of arising of consciousness, due to arising of mind-matter, the righteous ***meditator*** must keep in mind causes and results as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to arising of mind-matter, consciousness aggregate arises. 

Mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***, consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Persons with inadequate knowledge \_\_\_\_** 

If one can understand the way of keeping in mind causes and results of ***paţisandhi*** (5) aggregates, he will understand on each (5) aggregates of life-continuum and every mind- moment of cognitive process which are occurring throughout life. However those persons with  inadequate  knowledge  in  ***abhidhamma***  can  not  understand  as  mentioned  above. Therefore way of keeping in mind causes and results of (5) aggregate of life-continuum and every mind-moment will be presented. 

**7.2. Five aggregates of life-continuum (*bhavanga*)** 

1. Heart-base together with (6) kinds of corporeal units, (54) kinds of corporealities are corporeal aggregate. (Non-real corporealities must be kept in mind.) 
1. Among (34) kinds of ***bhavanga*** mental ***dhammas***, the feeling is called feeling aggregate. 
1. Among (34) kinds of ***bhavanga*** mental ***dhammas,*** the perception is called perception aggregate. 
1. Among  (34)  kinds  of  ***bhavanga***  mental  ***dhammas,***  the  volition  is  called  formation aggregate. (first method) Remaining (31) kinds of mental concomitants are called formation aggregate. (second method) 
1. Among  (34)  kinds  of  ***bhavanga***  mental  ***dhammas,***  the  consciousness  is  called consciousness aggregate. 
PAGE9

**7.2A. Life-continuum corporeal aggregate** 

**Five kinds of past causal *dhammas*** 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formations (= 34) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-261** 

Three kinds of present causal ***dhammas***. 

6. Consciousness  is  causal  ***dhammas;  (cittaja  rūpa)***  corporeal  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Temperature is causal ***dhammas; (utuja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Nutriment is causal ***dhammas; (āhāraja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Explanations\_\_\_\_\_ In some Pāli Text, ***upādāna paripavattana Sutta*** and  ***Sattaţţhānakusala Sutta***  etc,  the  Supreme  Buddha preached  that  “***āhārasamudayā  rūpasamudayo***  =  due  to arising of nutriment, corporeal aggregate arises”, and it means that only nutriment is present causal ***dhamma*** of corporeal aggregate. There is a reasonable question that even though this kind  of  preaching,  “due  to  arising  of  nutriment,  corporeal  aggregate  arise”,  is  present obviously,  why  those  causal  ***dhammas***,  consciousness  and  temperature  are  discerned minglingly? The answer is as follows. 

***Pāli Quotation(Patisam-A-1-235)*** 

**The  answer**  \_\_\_\_\_  Among  present  causal  ***dhammas***  called  ***pavattihetu***  of  corporeal ***dhammas***,  the  Supreme  Buddha  preached  only  a  causal  ***dhamma***  called  ***kabaļīkārāhāra*** because that kind of causal ***dhamma*** is very powerful and significant one. When that kind of causal ***dhamma*** is preached those present causal ***dhammas***, consciousness and temperature, are also finished to say through the peaching methodology called ***lakkhaņāhāranetti*** ( =same characteristic are preached collectively). Therefore it is essential to discern consciousness and temperature as present causal ***dhammas***. During keeping in mind causes & results only real corporealities are shown as priority in the resultant ***dhammas*** but non-real corporealities must also be keep in mind minglingly. 

In the continuum of mankind with process of conception into the mother’s womb, about second or third  weeks after beginning of conception, the external nutriment called ***bāhiraojā***, which arises simultaneously with the perishing phase of preceding mind moment, begins  arise pure octads produced by nutriment called ***suddhaţţhaka āhārajarūpa kalāpa*** at the arising phase of succeeding mind-moment. (**How cognitive processes arises-written by Maing-khine Sayadaw Page-36**) 

**Corporeal aggregate \_\_\_\_ (6) doors, (42) bodily parts** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE12

The righteous ***meditator*** can understand easily how causal relationship of corporeal aggregate occurring in (6) doors, (42) bodily parts can be kept in mind by taking example mentioned  above.  Some  corporeal  units,  which  are  produced  by  mind,  temperature, nutriment,  including  non-real  corporealities  must  also  be  kept  in  mind  together  with respective causal relationship. Those all kinds of corporeal ***dhammas*** occurring (6) doors, (42) bodily parts can be kept in mind on a whole similarly. 

**PAGE-262** 

During  keeping  mind  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  in  that  way  one  shuld  not practice through reciting only. If one can not see causal relationship by insight knowledge, he will not attain the knowledge of Cause and Condition really. 

Only when one sees each causal relationship between past or present causal ***dhammas*** and resulting (5) aggregates penetratively, causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept ijn mind systematically. 

**7.2. B *bhavanga* feeling aggregate** 

**Five kinds of past-causal *dhammas*,** 

1. Ignorance ( = 20) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving ( = 20) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging ( = 20) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base ( = 6 = 54) are causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object ( = ***kamma*** object) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) preceding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga***  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) succeeding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( 34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

[**Notes**  \_\_\_\_\_  In  this  case  two  kinds  of  ***bhavanga***  mind-contacts  are  shown  because preceding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact benefits succeeding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity etc.] 

**PAGE-263** 

According  to  the  term,  preceding  ***bhanvaga***  mind-contact,  (34)  kinds  of  mental ***dhammas***  of  life-continuum  must be  inferred.  The  life  continuum  which  is benefited by preceding one is termed as succeeding ***bhavanga***. There are (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** in  that  succeeding  ***bhavanga***  in  which  the  feeling  is  inferred  as  resultant  ***dhamma***  and remaining (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** are inferred as causal ***dhammas***. 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-51)*** 
PAGE11

In above preaching  the Supreme Buddha instructed to discern both agreeable feeling, disagreeable  feeling,  neutrality-feeling  which  arise  basing  on  mind-contact  and  feeling aggregate, perception aggregate, formation aggregate, consciousness aggregate, as the objects of  ***vipassanā***  practice.  Those  various  feelings  are  not  ***dhammas***  which  can  arise simultaneously within the same mind moment but specific kinds which can arise in each mind moment. Therefore those feelings or (4) kinds of mental aggregates may arise either together with causal mind-contact within the same mind moment or separately in different mind moments. The mind-contact within different mind moment is designated as preceding ***bhavanga***  mind-contact,  while  the  mind-contact  within  the  same  mind  moment,  as succeeding  ***bhavanga***  mind-contact.  It  should  be  recognized  similarly  on  every  mind moment. 

**7.2.C *bhavanga* perception aggregate** 

Ways of discerning in number 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 are the same as feeling aggregate. It will be presented on different one only. 8.  Contact (a) preceding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga***  perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) succeeding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( 34 – perception = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.2.D(i) *bhavanga* formation aggregate** 

` `**(volition must be inferred, first method)** 

Ways of discerning in number 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 are the same as feeling aggregate. It will be presented on different one only. 8.  Contact (a) preceding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga***  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) succeeding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( 34 – volition = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.2.D(ii) *bhavanga* formation aggregate** 

` `**(31-mental concomitants must be inferred, second method)** 

Ways of discerning in number 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 are the same as feeling aggregate. It will be presented on different one only. 8.  Contact (a) preceding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; ***bhavanga***  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) succeeding (3) kinds of mental aggregate of  ***bhavanga*** are causal ***dhammas***; ***bhavanga*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-264** 

**7.2.E *bhavanga* consciousness aggregate** 

Way of discerning in number 1,2,3,4,5 are the same as feeling aggregate. 

**Two kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

6. Contact = preceding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE14

7. Mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

[The term, mind (***nāma***), must be inferred as (33) kinds of mental concomitants. The term, matter (***rūpa***), must be inferred as base-corporeality and object corporeality.] 

**Relation of contiguity (*anantara paccaya*)\_\_\_\_\_** 

***purimā  purimā  avyākatā  dhammā  pacchimānam  pacchimānam  avyakatānam dhammānam anantara paccyena paccayo. (Paţţhāna-1-3)*** 

According to this preaching, preceding life-continuum mental ***dhammas***, which are consequence  and  indeterminate  (***avayākata***)  ***dhammas***,  benefit  succeeding  life-continuum mental  ***dhammas***,  which  are  consequence  and  indeterminate  (***avayākata***)  ***dhammas***,  by means of efficiency of relations of contiguity etc. Only when preceding mind moment ceases, can succeeding mind moment arises contiguously. 

The cessation of preceding mind moment is the causal ***dhamma*** for arising of succeeding mind moment. Therefore if those life-continuums, which are separated by two or three mind moments with consciousness of cognitive process, are discerned, two kinds of mind-contacts are shown as, 

1) Preceding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact (= 34) and  
1) Succeeding ***bhavanga*** mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) etc., 

Furthermore, according to the preaching as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Paţţhāna-1-3)*** 

In the session (***vāra***) in which life-continuum falls after impulsion, if causal ***dhammas*** of life-continuum after impulsion are discerned, two kinds of mind-contacts must be inferred as 

1) impulsion mind-contact 
1) ***bhavanga*** mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) 

In the session in which life-continuum falls after registering, if causal ***dhammas*** of life-continuum after registering are discerned, two kinds of mind-contacts must be inferred as 

1) registering mind-contact 
1) ***bhavanga*** mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) 

**PAGE-265** 

If causal ***dhammas*** of the first life-continuum after ***paţtisandhi*** are intended to be discerned, two kinds of mind-contacts must be inferred as 

1) ***paţisandhi*** mind-contact (= 34) and  
1) the first ***bhavanga*** mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) 

The ***meditator*** should understand two kinds of mind-contacts in this way. 

**Cognitive process with attachment on existence (*bhavanikantika lobha vīthi*)** 

After arising of (15) times or (16) times of life-continuum at the beginning of any newly existence, one time of mind-door adverting and (7) times of impulsion of cognitive process with attachment on existence called ***bhavanikantikalobhajavana*** arise continuously. Those impulsions are impulsions with strong attachment on acquired new existence of man or 
PAGE13

woman.  There  are  each  five  aggregates  in  mind-door  adverting  and  impulsions.  Way  of discerning on causal ***dhammas*** of those five aggregates is the same as way of discerning on impulsions of mind-door cognitive process with greed. The object of impulsion of cognitive process with attachment on existence is the object of newly existence. If the ***meditator*** is a gentleman, it is the object of new man’s existence; if the ***meditator*** is a lady, it is the object of new woman’s existence. 

Furthermore there are only (6) kinds of cognitive processes, viz, eye-door, ear-door, nose-door,  tongue-doors, body-door,  mind-door,  cognitive processes,  which  are  occurring throughout life and then the way of discerning causes and results of each mind moment within those (6) kinds of cognitive processes will be presented. 

The righteous ***meditator*** must take the object of colour of corporeal units by keeping in mind combination of the eye-door called eye-clear-sensitivity and the mind-door called ***bhavanga***  mind-clear-element.  At  that  time  eye-door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door cognitive process which takes the visible-object continuously will arise. In this case way of discerning causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of eye-door-cognitive process with the very great object  (***atimahantārammaņa***)  and  mind-door-cognitive  process  with  the  obvious  object (***vibhūtarammaņa***) will be presented as examples. Those cognitive processes with the great object  (***mahantārammaņa***),  the  slight  object  (***parittārammaņa***),  the  obscure  object (***avibhūtārammaņa***) must also be discerned by following examples. The righteous ***meditator*** should like to take objects of tables of ***nāmakammaţţhāna***. 

3. **Visible-object line – (5) aggregates of the five-doors-adverting** 
1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart and visible-objects are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among  (11)  kinds of  mental ***dhammas*** of five-doors-adverting, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
1. Among  (11)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  five-doors-adverting,  the  perception  is perception aggregate. 
1. Among (11) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of five-doors-adverting, the volition is formation aggregate. (First method) Among (11) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of five-doors-adverting, the remaining (8) kinds of mental concomitants is formation aggregate. (Second method) 
1. Among  (11)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  five-doors-adverting,  the  consciousness  is consciousness aggregate. 

**PAGE-266** 

**7.3,A Five-doors-adverting-corporeal aggregate** 

**Five kinds of past causal *dhammas*** 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formations (= 34) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE16

Three kinds of present causal ***dhammas***. 

6. Consciousness  is  causal  ***dhammas;  (cittaja  rūpa)***  corporeal  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Temperature is causal ***dhammas; (utuja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Nutriment is causal ***dhammas; (āhāraja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Five  –doors-adverting  consciousness**  \_\_\_\_\_  This  kind  of  consciousness  is  called  mere functioning  consciousness  (***kiriyā  citta***)  because  it  merely  takes  object.  It  is  not  a consciousness produced by past causal ***dhammas***, but by present causal ***dhammas***. However in the side of depended base corporealities, those are produced by four origins called ***kamma- citta-utu-āhāra*** and then causes and results must be kept in mind through discerning causal relationship between four origins and corporeal aggregate. 

**7.3.B Five-doors-adverting-feeling aggregate (Eye-door-cognitive process)** 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas*.** 

1. Base (heart = 6 = 54) are causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object ( = visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a)  ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; 

feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b)  five-door-adverting  mind-contact  (11  –  feeling  =  10)  is  causal  ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

[Notes: \_\_\_\_\_ In accordance with commentary called ***Visuddhi Magga*** which explains that ***bhanvangādiko  kiriyassa  …  (Vs-2-234)***,  those  mental  ***dhammas***  of  the  life-continuum, previous  to  five-doors-adverting,  benefits  mental  ***dhammas***  of  five-doors-adverting  by efficiency of relations of contiguity etc. The contact consisting in five-doors-adverting, in the next method, mental ***dhammas*** led by the contact consisting in five-doors-adverting, benefits (benefit)  feeling  aggregate of  five-doors-adverting by  means of efficiency  of relations of compatibility, mutuality etc. 

**PAGE-267** 

In the life-continuum it is shown (32) mental ***dhammas*** with referring to joyful life- continuum with three roots. Five-doors-adverting mind moment consists of (11) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** and then if the feeling is inferred as resultant ***dhamma***, remaining (10) kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  are  causal  ***dhammas***.  It  should  be  recognized  similarly  on formation aggregate. Furthermore all consciousness of cognitive processes, except fivefold consciousness, arise depending on the heart base and then if it is shown as base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) it means the heart-base together with (54) kinds of corporealities. Similarly if it is shown  that  (eye-base=  6  =  54),  it  means  the  eye-base  together  with  (54)  kinds  of corporealities. It should be understood similarly on remaining bases, ear-base etc. Then five aggregates of every mind moment showing as follows are eye-door cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process which are inclusive in wholesome  groups,  great wholesome deeds associating with agreeable feeling and knowledge, unprepared. It can be found in the first row of table shown in ***nāmakammaţţhāna***. 

**7.3.C Five-doors-adverting\_\_\_ perception aggregate** 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas*.** 

1. Base (heart = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE15

2. Object ( = visible object) is causal ***dhamma***;*** perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Contact (a) ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; 

perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) five-door-adverting mind-contact (11 – perception = 10) is causal ***dhamma***; perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.3.D Five-doors-adverting \_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(volition must be inferred as formation; the first method)** 

1. Base (heart = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object ( = visible object) is causal ***dhamma***;*** formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; 

formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) five-door-adverting  mind-contact (11 – volition = 10) is causal ***dhamma***; formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.3.D Five-doors-adverting\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(8  kinds  of  mental  concomitants  must  be  inferred  as  formations,  the  second method)** 

Four kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (heart = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object ( = visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact = ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Remaining (3) mental aggregates are causal ***dhammas***; formation aggregate is resultant ***dhammas***. 

**PAGE-268** 

[Notes:  \_\_\_\_\_  Those  causal  ***dhammas***,  “remaining  3”  mental  aggregates  mean  feeling aggregate, perception aggregate and consciousness aggregate.] 

**7.3.E Five-doors-adverting \_\_\_\_ consciousness aggregate** 

**Two kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

1. ***bhavanga*** mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhammas***, consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhammas***. 
1. Mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***, consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

The term, ***nāma*** (mind), means (10) kinds of associating mental concomitants. The term, ***rūpa*** (matter), means the heart base together with (54) kinds of corporeality and visible- object. 

4. **Visible-object line \_\_\_ (5) aggregate of seeing-consciousness** 

***Pāli Quotation (M-A-1-267)*** 

1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the eye and visible-objects are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among  (8)  kinds  of  mental ***dhammas***  of  seeing-consciousness,  the  feeling  is  feeling aggregate. 
1. Among  (8)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  seeing-consciousness,  the  perception  is perception aggregate. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE18

4. Among (8) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of seeing-consciousness, the volition is formation aggregate. (First method) Among (8) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of seeing-consciousness, the remaining (5) kinds of mental concomitants is formation aggregate. (Second method) 
4. Among  (8)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  seeing-consciousness,  the  consciousness  is consciousness aggregate. 

**7.4.A Seeing-consciousness \_\_\_ corporeal aggregate** 

**Five kinds of past causal *dhammas*** 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhammas; (kammaja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Three kinds of present causal ***dhammas***. 

6. Consciousness  is  causal  ***dhammas;  (cittaja  rūpa)***  corporeal  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Temperature is causal ***dhammas; (utuja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Nutriment is causal ***dhammas; (āhāraja rūpa)*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.** 

**PAGE-269** 

**7.4.B Seeing-consciousness-feeling aggregate** 

Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (seeing-consciousness)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (seeing-consciousness)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (seeing-consciousness)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (seeing-consciousness)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (seeing-consciousness)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Five kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= eye – base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Eye-contact (= 8-feeling =7) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Light is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Attention (= five-doors-adverting = 11) are causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE17

**Further explanations \_\_\_\_\_** 

**Contact  (*phassa*)**  \_\_\_\_\_  According  to  preachings  and  explanations,  “***phassa  samudayā vedanā  sammudayo  (Sam-2-49);  phassa  paccayā  vedanā  (Abhi-2-142);  cakkhuviññāņa sampayuttāya pana vattabbameva natthi (Sam-A-3-5)***; eye-contact together with five kinds of causal ***dhammas*** are shown although (4) kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** of seeing- consciousness  are  shown  generally.  That  eye-contact  also  benefits  ***cakkhusamphassajā*** ***vedana***  (=feeling  produced  by  eye-contact)  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of compatibility etc. 

**Light** (***āloka***) Four kinds of lights called firelight, moonlight, sunlight, light of knowledge, benefit  mental  ***dhammas***  of  seeing-consciousness  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relation  of determinative dependence etc. It has been explained the fact various kinds of objects can be seen  by  the  light  of  knowledge  which  is  produced  by  consciousness  of  ***samatha***  and ***vipassanā*** practice, in previous section, section of concentration of mindfulness of breathing. Those conditioned things were very obvious in the knowledge of ***Mahā Theras*** who stayed in the forest, such as ***Mahāsiva Thero***, even in the night. Those corporeality-mentality consist of both colour-object and mental ***dhammas*** of seeing-consciousness. Ability to discern the ultimate nature of visible-object by breaking down compactness of corporeality depends on the efficiency of light of knowledge. 

**PAGE-270** 

Ability to discern visible-object of corporeal unit concern with the eye of wisdom only because every corporeal unit can be seen by eye of wisdom only. 

In other words, only when efficiency the light of knowledge is powerful can visible- object of corporal units be seen and it can be said the ultimate nature of visible-object is seen. Only when ultimate nature of visible0object is seen by light of knowledge, conditioned things together with visible-object can be discerned as objects of ***vipassanā*** practice. Olden day ***Mahā Thera*** attained the Noble Fruit-Knowledge of ***Arahant*** even at night because they discerned on the ultimate nature of corporeality-mentality together  with visible object.  It should be recognized the fact that all four kinds of light benefit arising of mental ***dhammas*** of seeing-consciousness. In the aspect of ***vipassanā***, however, only the light of knowledge is essential. 

***Manasikāra*** (attention) \_\_\_\_\_ Factor of arising of seeing-consciousness are explained in the commentary (***Abhi-A-1-321***) as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. presence of normal condition of eye-clear-sensitivity \_\_\_\_\_ It means alive person's eye- clear-sensitivity is not affected by any kind of diseases, blood, bile, phlegm etc. Dead person's  eye  and  damaged  eye  of  alive  one  can  not  benefit  for  arising  of  seeing- consciousness. 
1. Only when visible-object strikes on the eye-clear-sensitivity which is normal condition, can seeing-consciousness arise. 
1. Only  when  the  light  is  present  can  visible-object  appear  on  the  eye-clear-sensivity, resulting in arising of seeing-consciousness. 
1. Even though the light is present, if an essential factor called ***manasikāra*** (attention) is absent, seeing-consciousness can not arise. 

In the commentary called ***Aţţhasālinī***, that factor called ***manasikāra*** is explained as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE20

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-1-321)*** 

According to explanation of above commentary, the term, ***manasikāra***, does not mean as the mental concomitant called ***manasikāra*** (attention), but the functional mind-element called adverting-consciousness. In other words, it means (11) mental ***dhammas*** together with ***manasikāra***  (attention)  which  are  consisting  in  adverting  mind  moment.  Those  mental ***dhammas*** are called the attention which is fundamental of cognitive processes. Unless that adverting consciousness give rise to cease continuity of life-continuum, mental ***dhammas*** of seeing-consciousness can not arise. 

**PAGE-271** 

Although seeing-consciousness arises through completion of four factors, it can not arise  singly  without  associating  ***dhammas***.  Therefore  those  associating  ***dhammas***,   eye- contact etc., are also shown as causal ***dhammas***. Causes and results must be kept in mind by seeing how seeing-consciousness together with associating ***dhammas*** arise in the presence of benefitting  of  five-doors-adverting  mental  ***dhammas***  with  the  efficiency  of  relations  of contiguity etc. 

**7.4.C Seeing-consciousness \_\_\_\_\_ perception aggregate** 

Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness)***  perception  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness)***  perception  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness)***  perception  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness)***  perception  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness)***  perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Five kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base  (=  eye  –  base  =  6  =  54)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;***  perception  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Eye-contact  (=  8-perception  =7)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  perception  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Light is causal ***dhamma***; perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Attention (= five-doors-adverting = 11) are  causal ***dhammas***; perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.4.D(i) Seeing-consciousness\_\_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(volition must be inferred as formation, First method)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3,  4, 5, 6, 7,  9, 10 are the same as perception aggregates. Difference will be presented. 8.  Eye-contact  (=  8  -  volition  =7)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  perception  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.4.D(ii) Seeing-consciousness\_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 
PAGE19

**(5 – mental concomitants must be inferred a formation, Second method)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3,  4, 5, 6, 7,  9, 10 are the same as perception aggregates. Difference will be presented. 8.  Remaining (3) mental aggregate are causal ***dhamma***; formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-272** 

**7.4.E Seeing-consciousness \_\_\_\_\_ consciousness aggregate** 

Ways  of  discerning  shown  in  number  1,  2,  3,  4,  5  are  the  same  as  perception aggregates. Difference will be presented. 

Three kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

6. Mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness)  consciousness  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Light  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness)  consciousness  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Attention  (=  five-doors-adverting  =  11)  are  causal  ***dhamma***;  (seeing-consciousness) consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

The  terms,  mind  (***nāma***),  means  (7)  kinds  of  mental  concomitants  which  are associating ***dhammas*** of seeing-consciousness. The term, matter (***rūpa***), means (54) kinds of base corporealities and visible-object. 

5. **Visible-object line\_\_\_\_ (5) aggregates of receiving consciousness** 
1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart and visible-objects are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (11) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of receiving, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
1. Among  (11)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  receiving,  the  perception  is  perception aggregate. 
1. Among (11) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of receiving, the volition is formation aggregate. (First method) Among (11) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of receiving, the remaining (8) kinds of mental concomitants is formation aggregate. (Second method) 
1. Among (11) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of receiving, the consciousness is consciousness aggregate. 

**7.5.A Receiving \_\_\_\_ corporeal aggregate** 

Ways of discerning on corporeal aggregate of receiving-consciousness are the same as five-doors-adverting consciousness. 

**7.5.B Receiving \_\_\_\_ feeling aggregate** 

Three kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE22

6. Base (= eye – base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; receiving feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) Receiving mind-contact (=11 – feeling = 10) is causal ***dhamma***; receiving feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Contact**\_\_\_\_\_ In accordance with these preachings, “***phassa samudayā vedanā samudayo; phassa  samudayā  saññāsamudayo;  phassa  samudayā  sańkhāra  samudayo;  (Sam-2-49)***, when feeling-perception- 

**PAGE-273** 

consciousness arise, due to arising of contact, the causal ***dhammas***, contact can be inferred as two kinds in this section, i.e, (a) eye-contact = (8) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** together with seeing-consciousness and (b) mind-contacts = contacts which are associating with receiving, investigating, determining, impulsion, registering; in other words, mental ***dhammas*** which are led by those contacts. 

Eye-contact  also  benefits  those  consciousness  of  cognitive  process,  which  arise continuously after itself, by means of efficiency of relations of determinative dependence etc. Then each consciousness of cognitive process also consists of contact. Mental ***dhammas*** which  are  led  by  contact  also  benefit  each  other  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of compatibility etc. Therefore contact is shown as two kinds separately. 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-248 – Pahāna Sutta)*** 

***(Sam-A-3-5)*** 

In above ***Pāli*** Text of ***Saļāyatana Vagga***, ***Samyutta***, there are many preachings as examples in which feeling is preached as priority and then how mental ***dhammas*** of five- doors-cognitive process, i.e., receiving, investigating, determining, impulsion etc, and those of  mind-door-cognitive  process,  mind-door-adverting,  impulsion,  etc,  arise  consequently basing on eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, mind-contact, as fundamentals. 

In ***Aparijānana Sutta*** (***Sam-2-249, 250***) the Supreme Buddha instructed to practice for attainment of three kinds of full understanding (***pariññā***) on both mental ***dhammas*** of seeing-consciousness and mental ***dhammas*** led by feeling, which arise basing on eye-contact. This  stage  of  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  cause  and  condition,  is  inclusive  in  the  full understanding on object (***ñātapariññā***), It should be recognized similarly on ear-contact etc. Therefore the causal ***dhamma***, contact, is shown as two kinds separately. 

**7.5.C Receiving \_\_\_perception aggregate** 

Ways  of  discerning  shown  in  number  1,  2,  3,  4,  5, 6,  7  are  the  same  as  feeling aggregate. Difference will be presented. 8.  Contact  (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; receiving perception aggregate is 

`     `resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b)  Receiving  mind-contact  (=11  –  perception  =  10)  is  causal  ***dhamma***; receiving perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE21

**PAGE-274** 

**7.5.D(i) Receiving-formation aggregate (Volition must be inferred as formation, First method)** 

Ways  of  discerning  shown  in  number  1,  2,  3,  4,  5, 6,  7  are  the  same  as  feeling aggregate. Difference will be presented. 8.  Contact  (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; receiving formation aggregate is 

`     `resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) Receiving mind-contact (=11 – volition = 10) is causal ***dhamma***; receiving formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.5.D(ii) Receiving\_\_\_ formation aggregate (8 kinds of mental concomitants must be inferred as formation, Second method)** 

Ways  of  discerning  shown  in  number  1,  2,  3,  4,  5, 6,  7  are  the  same  as  feeling aggregate. Difference will be presented. 8.  Contact  (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; receiving formation aggregate is 

`     `resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) Remaining (3) mental aggregates are causal ***dhammas***; receiving formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.5.E Receiving\_\_\_ consciousness aggregate** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are the same as feeling aggregate.  

6. Eye-contact (=8) is causal ***dhammas***; (receiving)  consciousness  aggregate is resultant ***dhammas***. 
6. Receiving  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  (receiving)  consciousness  aggregate  is resultant ***dhammas***. 

The term, mind (***nāma***), means (10) kinds of mental concomitants associating with receiving consciousness; 

The term, matter (***rūpa***), means (54) kinds of depended base corporealities and visible object. 

6. **Visible-object line\_\_\_\_ (5) aggregates of investigating consciousness** 
1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart and visible-objects are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of investigating, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
1. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental ***dhammas***  of  investigating,  the perception  is perception aggregate. 
1. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  investigating,  the  volition  is  formation aggregate. (First method) Among (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of investigating, the remaining (9) kinds of mental concomitants is formation aggregate. (Second method) 
1. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  investigating,  the  consciousness  is consciousness aggregate. 

[Notes: \_\_\_\_\_ If investigating consciousness associates with agreeable feeling, it consists of (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  including  ***pīti***  (pleasurable  interest);  if  it  associates  with neutrality  feeling,  it  consists  of  (11)  kinds  of  mental ***dhammas***  without ***pīti***  (pleasurable 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE24

interest). If impulsion associates with ***pīti***, investigating consciousness usually associates with ***pīti***. If impulsion does not associate with ***pīti***, investigating consciousness also lacks ***pīti***. 

**7.6.A Investigating \_\_\_\_\_ corporeal aggregate** 

Ways of discerning  on corporeal aggregate of investigating  mind moment are the same as five-doors-adverting mind moment. 

**PAGE-275** 

**7.6B Investigating \_\_\_\_\_ feeling aggregate** 

Three kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)***  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Receiving  mind-contact  (=11)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Investigating  mind-contact  (  =12  –  feeling  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhammas***; (investigating) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.6.C Investigating \_\_\_\_ perception aggregate** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 are the same as (investigating) feeling aggregate. 8.  Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating) perception aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Receiving mind-contact (=11) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Investigating  mind-contact  (  =12  –  perception  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhammas***; (investigating) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.6.D(i) Investigating \_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(volition must be inferred as formation, First method)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 are the same as investigating feeling aggregate. 8.  Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating) formation aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Receiving mind-contact (=11) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Investigating  mind-contact  (  =12  –  volition  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhammas***; (investigating) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE23

**PAGE-276** 

**7.6.D(ii) Investigating \_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(‘9’ kinds of mental concomitant must be inferred as formation, Second method)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 are the same as investigating feeling aggregate. 

8. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; investigating formation aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) Receiving  mind-contact  (=11)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  investigating  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
8. Remaining (3) kinds of mental aggregates are causal ***dhammas***; investigating formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.6.E Investigating \_\_\_\_ Consciousness aggregate** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are the same as investigating feeling aggregate. 

6. (a)  Eye-contact  (  =  8)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  investigating  consciousness  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) Receiving  mind-contact  (=11)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  investigating  consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Investigating min-matter are causal ***dhammas***; investigating consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

The  term,  mind  (***nāma***),  means  (11)  kinds  of  mental  concomitants  which  are associating with investigating consciousness; the term, matter (***rūpa***) means (54) kinds of depended base corporealities and visible-object. 

**7.7.A Visible-object line\_\_\_\_ (5) aggregates of determining consciousness** 

1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart and visible-objects are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of determining, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
1. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  determining,  the  perception  is  perception aggregate. 
1. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  determining,  the  volition  is  formation aggregate. (First method) Among (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of determining, the remaining (9) kinds of mental concomitants is formation aggregate. (Second method) 
1. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  determining,  the  consciousness  is consciousness aggregate. 

[Notes:  \_\_\_\_\_\_  This  determining  consciousness  is  only  merefunctioning  consciousness (***kiriya citta***) but not consequence consciousness, resulting in lacking past causal ***dhammas***. The  way  of  discerning  on  corporeal  aggregate  which  is  depended  base  of  determining consciousness  is  the  same  as  corporeal  aggregate  which  is  depended  base  of  five-doors- adverting consciousness.] 

**7.7.B Determining \_\_\_\_\_ feeling aggregate** 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

1. Base  (=  heart-base  =  6  =  54)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  determining  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; 

(determining) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE26

3. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Investigating mind-contact (=12) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Determining  mind-contact  (  =12  –  feeling  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhammas***; (determining) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-277** 

**7.7.C Determining \_\_\_\_\_ perception aggregate** 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; determining perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; determining perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; determining perception aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Investigating mind-contact (=12) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Determining  mind-contact  (  =12  –  perception  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhammas***; (determining) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.7.D(i) Determining \_\_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(volition must be inferred as formation; First method)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, are the same as feeling aggregate. 

\3.  Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) formation aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Investigating mind-contact (=12) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Determining  mind-contact  (=12  –  volition  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhammas***; (determining) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.7.D(ii) Determining \_\_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(‘9’ kinds mental concomitants must be inferred as formation; Second method)** Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, are the same as feeling aggregate. 

3. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) formation aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) Investigating mind-contact (=12) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Remaining  (3)  mental  aggregates  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  (determining)  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.7.E Determining \_\_\_\_\_ consciousness aggregate** 

1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (determining) consciousness aggregate is  

resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b)  Investigating  mind-contact  (=12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (determining) consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Determining mind-matter are causal ***dhammas***; (determining) consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE25

The  term,  mind  (***nāma***),  means  (11)  kinds  of  mental  concomitants  which  are associating with determining consciousness; the term,  matter  (***rūpa***) means (54)  kinds of depended base corporealities of determining and visible-object. 

**PAGE-278** 

**7.8.A Visible-object line\_\_\_\_ (5) aggregates of wholesome impulsion (eye-door-cognitive** 

**process)** 

1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart and visible-objects are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
1. Among  (34)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  impulsion,  the  perception  is  perception aggregate. 
1. Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion, the volition is formation aggregate. (First method) Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion, the remaining (31) kinds of mental concomitants are formation aggregate. (Second method) 
1. Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion, the consciousness is consciousness aggregate. 

[Notes: \_\_\_\_\_\_ Corporeal aggregate which is depended base of impulsion must be discerned as corporeal aggregate which is depended base of five-doors-adverting similarly. In this case, the determining consciousness determines the object as visible-object (= colour) and then it is wise  attention  called  ***yonisomanasikāra***,  resulting  in  falling  as  wholesome  impulsion. Wholesome impulsion is not consequence mental ***dhamma***, resulting in lacking past causal ***dhammas***. Therefore present causal ***dhammas*** only are essential to be discerned as causal resationship.] 

**7.8.B First wholesome impulsion \_\_\_\_\_ feeling aggregate** 

`       `**(eye-door-cognitive process)** 

Four kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object  (=  visible  object)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) First impulsion mind-contact (34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Wise attention (= determining = 12) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

***Yonisomanisikāra*** \_\_\_\_\_ Way of taking into heart on the visible-object, colour, which is performed through only colour, corporeal ***dhamma***, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta, asubha***, causal ***dhmmas***  and  resultant  ***dhamma***,  is  called  ***yonisomanisikāra***  (wise  attention).  It  is  a fundamental attention of the impulsion. The basis meaning of attention are determining (= 12 kinds of mental ***dhammas***) and mind-door-adverting (= 12 kinds of mental ***dhammas*** for eye- door and mind-door cognitive processes respectively. 

**PAGE-279** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE28

Among those two kinds, the determining can determine visible-object as only colour. (It means only ***yonisomanisikāra. Ayonisomanisikāra*** will be presented later separately.) It can not determine as any kind of general characters, ***anicca, dukkha, anatta, asubha***, causal ***dhmmas*** and resultant ***dhamma***. That kind of determination can be accomplished by mind- door cognitive process. This is because all kinds of mental ***dhammas*** consisting in eye-door- cognitive process can take visible-object as colour only for arising of wholesome impulsion. Actually the whole eye-door cognitive process is unable to determine precisely only. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by seeing efficiency of relations of contiguity etc, of (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of determining mind moment for arising of feling aggregate. It should be recognized similarly on perception aggregate etc. 

**7.8.C First wholesome impulsion-perception aggregate** 

Four kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) perception aggregate is  

resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) First impulsion mind-contact (34 – perception = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

4. Wise  attention  (=  determining  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.8.D(i) First wholesome impulsion \_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(volition must be inferred as formation, First method)** 

Four kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object  (=  visible  object)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  formation  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) formation aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) First impulsion mind-contact (34 – volition = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Wise  attention  (=  determining  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-280** 

**7.8.D(ii) First wholesome impulsion \_\_\_\_ formation aggregate** 

**(‘31’  kinds  of  mental  concomitants  must  be  inferred  as  formation,  Second method)** 

**Four kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object  (=  visible  object)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  formation  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE27

3. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) formation aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) Remaining  (3)  kinds  of  mental  aggregates  are  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first impulsion) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Wise  attention  (=  determining  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.8.E First wholesome impulsion – Consciousness aggregare** 

1. Contact (=Eye-contact  = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. First  impulsion  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Wise attention (= determining = 12) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

The term, mind (***nāma***), means (33) mental concomitants which are associating with the first wholesome impulsion. The term, matter (***rūpa***) means (54) kinds of depended base corporealities within heart and visible-object. 

**Variation in association of knowledge and pleasurable interest (*pīti*)** 

If the wholesome impulsion mentioned above arises together with neutrality feeling, pleasurable interest called ***pīti*** can not associate with it, resulting in (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** within that mind moment. If the knowledge called ***paññā*** does not associate, there will be (33) kinds of mental ***dhammas***; if both knowledge and pleasurable interest do not associate, there will be (32) kinds of mental ***dhammas***. If the investigating mind moment arises together with neutrality feeling, pleasurable interest can not associate with it. If that mind moment arises together with agreeable feeling, pleasurable interest can associate with it. If great consequence registering arises, it should be recognized it is similar to impulsion. If rootless investigating registering arises, it should be recognized it is similar to investigating. 

Therefore there will be variations in numbers of mental ***dhammas*** of investigating, impulsion,  registering  depending  on  variation  in  association  with  or  dissociation  from knowledge and pleasurable interest. Especially, the righteous ***meditator*** should be careful the numbers  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  investigating  mind-contact,  impulsion  mind-contact, registering mind-contact and formation aggregate (second method). It should be recognized remaining  mental  concomitants,  excluding  feeling,  perception,  consciousness,  can  be designated as formation aggregate in the Second method. 

Second impulsion etc., must also be discerned in order to attain Knowledge of Cause and Condition. In those second impulsion etc., there are a few difference in case of contact. 

***Pāli Quotation (Paţţhāna-1-3)(Abhi-A-3-363)* PAGE-281** 

According  to  these  ***Pāli***  Text  and  commentary,  in  the  case  of  contact  of  causal ***dhammas*** of the second impulsion the first impulsion mind-contact must also be kept in mind because  preceding  wholesome  impulsion  benefits  succeeding  impulsion  by  means  of efficiency of relation of contiguity etc. The contact is intended to be said as priority. That relation of contiguity etc must be added in the way of discerning on the first impulsion etc, and  registering  consciousness.  Second  impulsion  feeling  aggregate  is  presented  as  an 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE30

example. The ***meditator*** should like to discern remaining mental aggregates of the second impulsion, remaining impulsions and registering by following this example. 

**7.9.B Visible-object line – Second wholesome-impulsion\_\_ feeling aggregate (eye-door-**

**cognitive process)** 

**Four kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object  (=  visible  object)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (second  impulsion)  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First impulsion mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Second impulsion  mind-contact ( =34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Wise  attention  (=  determining  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (second  impulsion)  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Relation of contiguity (*anantara paccaya*)** 

Succeeding impulsions are benefitted by preceding impulsions by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity, such as the second impulsion benefitted by the first impulsion, the third  impulsion  is  benefitted  by  the  second  impulsion  and  so  forth.  In  above  way  of discerning shown in 3(b), this kind of causal ***dhammas*** must be replaced. 

**PAGE-282** 

**7.10.A  Visible-object  line\_\_\_\_  (5)  aggregates  of  first  registering  (eye-door-cognitive** 

**process)** 

1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart and visible-objects are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of registering, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
1. Among  (34)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  registering,  the  perception  is  perception aggregate. 
1. Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of registering, the volition is formation aggregate. (First method) Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of registering, the remaining (31) kinds of mental concomitants are formation aggregate. (Second method) 
1. Among (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of registering, the consciousness is consciousness aggregate. 

Corporeal aggregate of registering must be discerned similarly to that of five-doors- adverting. 

**7.10.B First registering - feeling aggregate (eye-door-cognitive process)** 

**Five kinds of past-causal *dhammas*,** 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant 

***dhamma***. 
PAGE29

3. Clinging  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Seventh impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.10.C First registering – perception aggregate (eye-door-cognitive process)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 are the same as feeling aggregate of the first registering. 

\8.  Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) perception aggregate is  

`       `resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Seventh impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 34 – perception = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; (first registering) perception aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.10.D(i) First registering – formation aggregate (eye-door-cognitive process) (volition** 

**must be inferred as formation, First method)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 are the same as feeling aggregate of the first registering. 

\8.  Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) formation aggregate is  

`       `resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Seventh impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 34 – volition = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; (first registering) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-283** 

**7.10.D(ii)  First  registering  –  formation  aggregate  (eye-door-cognitive  process)  (‘31’** 

**mental concomitants must be inferred as formation, Second method)** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE32

Ways of discerning shown in number 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 are the same as feeling aggregate of the first registering. 

8. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) formation aggregate is  

`       `resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) Seven impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

9. Remaining  (3)  mental  aggregates  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  (first  registering)  formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.10.E First registering – consciousness aggregate (eye-door-cognitive process)**  

Ways of discerning shown in number 1,2,3,4,5 are the same as feeling aggregate of the first registering. 

**Two kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) consciousness  aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) Seventh impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. First  registering  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  (first  registering)  consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

The term, mind (***nāma***), means (33) mental concomitants which are associating with the (first registering) consciousness; the term, matter (***rūpa***), mean (54) kinds of depended base corporealities within heart and visible-object. 

**To be noticed in general: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_** 

If great consequence registering falls, numbers of mental ***dhammas*** may be, 

1. (34) with agreeable feeling, associated with knowledge; 
1. (33) with agreeable feeling, dissociated with knowledge; 
1. (33) with neutrality feeling, associated with knowledge; 
1. (32) with neutrality feeling, dissociated with knowledge; 
1. If rootless joyful investigating registering falls, numbers of mental ***dhammas*** are (12); 
1. If rootless neutral investigating registering falls, numbers of mental ***dhammas*** are (11) respectively. 

In above example, great consequence registering with agreeable feeling, associated with knowledge is shown as example. If another kinds of registering fall, numbers of mental concomitants will be decreased in formation aggregate only. 

**PAGE-284** 

If those kinds of registering, viz, rootless wholesome consequence joyful investigating registering,  rootless  wholesome  consequence  neutral  investigating  registering,  rootless unwholesome  consequence  neutral  investigating  registering  fall,  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind by following example of investigating shown in 7.6. 

Casual and resultant ***dhammas*** of the second registering must also be kept in mind by grouping five aggregates. Way of grouping into five aggregate is the same as first registering. Way of discerning on corporeal aggregate is the same as shown in corporeal aggregate of 
PAGE31

five-doors-adverting.  Way  of  discerning  on  feeling  aggregate  will  be  presented  as follows.\_\_\_\_\_ 

**7.11.B Second registering\_\_\_ feeling aggregate (eye-door-cognitive process)** 

**Five kinds of past-causal *dhammas*,** 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal ***dhamma***;  (second  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is  

resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) First registering mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Second  registering  mind-contact  (=34-feeling  =  33)  is  causal  ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.12 Mind-door cognitive processes which take visible-object** 

So far as this extent, way of discerning on five aggregates of second registering can be understood. Remaining wholesome groups mental ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind by taking examples shown in above. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of every mind moment in all rows of tables of ***nāmakammaţţhāna*** must be kept in mind by grouping five aggregates. 

Furthermore,  many  times  of  life-continuums  fall  after  eye-door-cognitive  process. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of those life-continuums must also be kept in mind by taking example shown in previous section, 7.2. 

**PAGE- 285** 

If the life-continuum, which is intended to be discerned, is adjacent to impulsion, seventh impulsion benefitts it by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity etc. If it is adjacent to registering, second registering benefitts it by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity etc. If it is adjacent to life-continuum, preceding life-continuum benefitts it and so forth. 

Furthermore  after  those  life-continuums,  mind-door-cognitive  process  which  takes visible-object taken by eye-door-cognitive process can also arise successively. One should not misunderstand the fact mind-door-cognitive process  can take only past visible object 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE34

which has been taken by  eye-door-cognitive process. There are also  mind-door-cognitive process which can take present visible-object. 

***etam  (=  pañcadvārika  javanam)  na  lakkhaņārammaņika  vipassanāvasena pavattati…*** 

***pa… sabbopi panesa pabhedo manodvārikajavaneyeva labbhati. (Abhi-A-2- 388)*** 

Impulsion of five-door-cognitive process can not arise by means of ***vipassanā*** practice with general characters of conditioned things including visible-object…R… Impulsions of ***vipassanā*** with general characters called ***anicca, dukkha, anatta*** of conditioned things are worth getting in mind-door-cognitive process only. ***(Abhi-A-2-388)*** 

According  to  this  explanation  of  commentary,  impulsions  of  mind-door-cognitive process  have  got  efficiency  to  see  penetratively  until  momentary  present  (***khaņa paccuppanna***)  of  impermanence  nature,  suffering  nature,  non-self  nature  of  conditioned things  including  visible-object.  Therefore  impulsions  of  mind-door-cognitive  process  can take not only object of past conditioned things but also object of present conditioned things and future ones really. It should be recognized in this way. 

In a process with a obvious object (***vibhūtalambana***), there are once for mind-door- adverting, (7) times of impulsions, (2) times of registering and in a process with an obscure object  (***avibhūta  lambana***),  there  are  once  for  mind-door  adverting  and  (7)  times  of impulsions successively. 

1. There are (12) mental ***dhammas*** in the mind-door-adverting mind moment. 
1. There are 34/33/33/32 mental ***dhammas*** in each kind of impulsions, if it is great wholesome impulsion. 
1. There are 34/33/33/32 mental ***dhammas*** in each kind of registerings, if it is great consequence registering. 
1. There  are  12/11  mental  ***dhammas***  in  each  kind  of  registerings,  if  it  is  rootless investigating registering, accordingly. 

Way of grouping five aggregates of the mind-door adverting is the same as the way shown in determining. Way of discerning on corporeal aggregate of mind-door-adverting is the same as the way shown in five-doors-adverting. 

12. **Visible-object line-Mind-door-adverting feeling aggregate** 

Three kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact  (a)  Eye-contact  (  =  8)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (mind-door-adverting)  feeling aggregate  

is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Life continuum mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; (mind-door-adverting) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Mind-door-adverting mind-contact (= 12 - feeling = 11) is causal ***dhamma***; (mind-door-adverting) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-286** 
PAGE33

***cakkhusamphassa*** (eye-contact) ***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-3-368)*** 

In  the  relation  of  contiguous  determinative  dependence  (***anantarūpanissaya paccaya***), causal ***dhammas*** are mental ***dhammas*** of preceding mind moment while resultant ***dhammas***,  mental  ***dhammas***  of  succeeding  mind  moment.  In  those  relations,  object determinative  dependence  (***ārammaņūpanissaya***)  and  natural  determinative  dependence (***pakatūpanissaya***)  causal  ***dhammas***  benefitt  resultant  ***dhammas***  by  means  of  respective cognitive processes which are separated from each other. Therefore mental ***dhammas*** of eye- contact are shown as causal ***dhammas*** of mental ***dhammas*** consisting in mind-door-cognitive process which takes visible–object continuously. Because powerful ***vipassanā*** impulsions can take visible-object together with conditioned things without eye-contact, supporting factor of the eye-contact may be lacking at that time. 

**Life-continuum mind-contact\_\_\_\_\_** 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-248) (Sam-A-3-5) (Sam-ţī-2-286)*** 

According to these ***Pāli** Text*, commentary and sub-commentary, mental ***dhammas*** of life-continuum,  which  are  led  by  life-continuum  mind-contact,  which  arise  previously  to conformational mind-door-cognitive process (***tadanuvattikā manodvāra vīthi***) benefitt 

1. each other, 
1. mental ***dhammas*** of mind-door adverting, 
1. mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion, 
1. mental ***dhammas*** of registering, if registering falls after impulsion. Therefore life- continuum mind-contact is also shown as causal ***dhammas*** of mind-door-cognitive which takes visible-object continuously. 

**PAGE-287** 

If this way of discerning on feeling aggregate of mind-door-adverting is understood, discerning on remaining aggregates can be understood easily by taking examples shown in previous section. Way of keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of feeling aggregate of first impulsion which is inclusive in the mind-door-cognitive process which takes visible- object continuously will be presented as follows. (Way of grouping five aggregates of each impulsion and registering mind moment is the same as shown in eye-door-cognitive process.) 

13. **B Visible-object line \_\_\_\_First wholesome impulsion – feeling aggregate** 

Four Kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate  

is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Life  continuum  mind-contact  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE36

3) first impulsion mind-contact (= 34 - feeling = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; (first- impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Wise attention (= mind-door-adverting = 12) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling- aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
14. **B Visible-object line\_\_\_\_ Second wholesome impulsion-feeling aggregate** 

Four Kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Life continuum mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) first impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) second  impulsion  mind-contact  (=  34  –  feeling  =  33)  is  causal  ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Wise  attention  (=  mind-door-adverting  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  second  impulsion feeling-aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-288** 

So far as this extent, remaining aggregates of both the first and second impulsions and five aggregates of the third impulsion can be understood by taking example shown above. 

***Yonisomanasikāra*** \_\_\_\_ Way of determination of visible-object (= colour) as (1) visible- object (= colour) only, (2) ***anicca*** (3) ***dukkha*** (4) ***anatta*** (5) ***asubha***, is called wise attention (***yonisomanasikāra***) and then the basic meaning of wise attention is the mind-door-adverting (= 12 mental ***dhammas***) but not impulsion in this case. It is called a kind of attention which is fundamental of impulsion (***javanapaţipādaka manasikāra***). Therefore those kinds of saying, wise attention and mind-door-adverting (=12), are the same in the basic meaning. 

15. **First registering-feeling aggregate (mind-door-cognitive process)** 

**Five kinds of past-causal *dhammas*,** 

1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  first  registering***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; first registering*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  first  registering***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  first  registering***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency  of ***kamma***  (=  34)  is  causal ***dhamma***;  first  registering***  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; first registering feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE35

2) Life-continuum mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; first registering feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Seventh impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; first registering feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
   4) First registering mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; first registering feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE–289** 

***Seventh impulsion mind-contact (=34) and registering consciousness*** 

***Pāli Quotation (Paţţhāna–1-3) (Abhi-A-3-363)*** 

Preceding  wholesome  ***dhammas***  benefitt  succeeding  indeterminate  (***abyākata***) ***dhammas*** by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity. (***Paţţhāna-1-3***) 

The Supreme Buddha preached that\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. If  registering  falls  after  wholesome  impulsion,  that  wholesome  ***dhamma***  benefitts consequent indeterminate ***dhamma*** called registering by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity; 
1. if  life-continuum  falls  after  wholesome  impulsion, that  wholesome ***dhamma*** benefitts consequent  indeterminate  ***dhamma***  called  life-continuum  by  means  of  efficiency  of relation of contiguity. 
1. ***Pāli Quotation (Paţţhāna-1-138)*** 

Wholesome  ***dhamma***  called  the  adaptation  (***anuloma***)  which  is  consisting  in  the cognitive process of Fruition-Absorption of trainees who have attained the three lower Paths and  Fruits  benefitts  consequent  indeterminate  ***dhamma***  called  impulsion  of  Fruition- Absorption by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity. 

Great  mere  functioning  indeterminate  (***mahā  kiriyā  avyākata***)  called  the  adaptation (***anuloma***) which is consisting in the cognitive process of Fruition-Absorption of ***Arahant*** benefitts  consequent  indeterminate  ***dhamma***  called  impulsion  of  Fruition-Absorption  of ***Arahant*** by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity. (***Abhi-A-3-363***) 

In accordance with these ***Pāli Text*** and commentary, it should be recognized that wholesome ***dhammas*** also benefitt consequent registering by means of efficiency of relation of contiguity. 

16. **B Second registering-feeling aggregate (mind-door-cognitive process**) 

**Five kinds of past-causal *dhammas*,** 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; second registering*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  second  registering***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  second  registering***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; second registering*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE38

5. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; second registering*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; second registering feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Life-continuum  mind-contact  (=34)  iscausal ***dhamma***;  (second  registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Second registering mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-290** 

So far as this extent, remaining mental aggregates can also be understood easily. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of every mind moment consisting in 

1) eye-door cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive process without pleasurable interest but associated with knowledge; 
1) eye-door cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process with pleasurable interest but dissociated from knowledge; 
1) eye-door cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process dissociated from both kinds of pleasurable interest and knowledge and 
1) eye-door cognitive process and mind-door cognitive process associated with both kinds of  pleasurable  interest  and  knowledge  as  mentioned  above,  must  be  kept  in  mind thoroughly. Numbers of mental ***dhammas*** of formation aggregate  and contact can be varied  depending  on  associated  with  or  dissociated  from  pleasurable  interest  and knowledge,  resulting  in  34,33,33,32  accordingly.  Furthermore  numbers  of  mental ***dhammas***  of  investigating  may  be  varied  as  12/11,  depending  on  associated  with  or dissociated from pleasurable interest. Numbers of mental ***dhammas*** of great consequence registering are the same as those of wholesome impulsion. Numbers of mental ***dhammas*** of  investigating  registering  are  the  same  as  those  of  investigating.  The  righteous ***meditator*** should like to discern by taking example mentioned above. 

***Visible-object line- Mind-door-cognitive process*** 

Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of every mind moment consisting in these cognitive processes which is discerning and knowing on visible-object (which is present within a corporeal unit) as… 

1. corporeal ***dhammas***, 
1. ***anicca*** (impermanence), 
1. ***dukkha*** (suffering), 
1. ***anatta*** (non-self), 
1. ***asubha*** (loathsomeness) 

must  be  kept  in  mind  continuously.  If  visible-object  is  discerned  as  ***anicca***,  way  of determination as impermanence is wise attention. The ***meditator*** should like to understand variation in numbers of mental concomitants depending on those cognitive process associated with or dissociated from pleasurable interest and knowledge. 
PAGE37

**PAGE -291** 

Now examples of ways of keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of mental ***dhammas*** of unwholesome groups, in other words, mental ***dhammas*** of eye-door-cognitive process  and  mind-door-cognitive  process  which  fall  unwholesome  impulsions,  will  be presented. Among those mind moments ways of discerning on five-doors-adverting, seeing- consciousness,  receiving,  investigating,  determining  are  the  same  as  shown  in  eye-door- cognitive process of wholesome groups. In this place the first consciousness of impulsion, rooted  in  greed,  accompanied  by  pleasurable  interest,  associated  with  wrong  view, unprompted  (***somanassa  sahagata  diţţhigata  sampayutta  asańkhārika  citta***)  will  be presented as example. 

17. **A Visible-object line- wrong view group (5) aggregates of the first impulsion rooted in greed (eye-door-cognitive process)** 
1. (54) kinds of corporealities within the heart and visible-object are corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (20) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion rooted in greed, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
1. Among (20) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion rooted in greed, the perception is perception aggregate. 
1. Among  (20)  kinds  of  mental ***dhammas***  of  impulsion  rooted  in  greed,  the  volition  is formation aggregate. (First method) Among (20) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion rooted in greed, the remaining (17) kinds of mental concomitants is formation aggregate. (Second method) 
1. Among (20) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of impulsion rooted in greed, the consciousness is consciousness aggregate. 

Way of discerning on corporeal aggregate which is dependence of impulsion rooted in greed  is  the  same  as  corporeal  aggregate  which  is  dependence  of  wholesome  impulsion shown in 7.8.A. 

17. **B Wrong view group-First impulsion-feeling aggregate (eye-door-cognitive process)** Four kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 
1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; first impulsion feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; first impulsion feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; first impulsion feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) First impulsion mind-contact (20 – feeling = 19) is causal ***dhamma***; first impulsion feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Unwise attention (= determining = 12) is causal ***dhamma***; first impulsion feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Unwise  attention  (***ayonisomanasikāra***)means  wrong  determination  on  object  as desirable or undesirable object etc. Unwholesome impulsions arise basing on that unwise attention  accordingly.  Five-doors-cognitive  processes  in  other  words,  impulsions  of  five- doors-cognitive processes are unable to distinguish on object as either ***nicca, sukha, atta, subha***,  or  ***anicca,  dukkha,  anatta,  asubha***  but  only  impulsions  of  mind-door-cognitive process can distinguish. It is already explained previously. (See ***nāmakammaţţhāna***, **Volume** 

**II**.)  Although  an  explanation,  “determining  consciousness  within  five-doors-cognitive 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE40

process determines object as desirable object or undesirable object etc”, is present through traditional  teaching  methodology,  that  determining  mind  moment  is  unable  to  determine object certainly. This is because five-doors-cognitive processes can know colour only, sound only  etc.  This  ability  of  those  cognitive  processes  would  be  scrutinized  carefully.  (See Subcommentary of Comprehensive Manual of ***Abhidhamma***, by ***Ashin Janakābhivamsa***, page 161, 162.) 

**PAGE-292** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-2-323) (Abhi -2-333)*** 

In this case all consciousness within fivefold doors, either fivefold consciousness or both  receiving  mind-element  which  arises  after  consciousness  and  mind-consciousness- elements  which  arise  after  receiving  consciousness,  which  are  worth  adding  through  the word, pi (both…and..), can not know any kind of wholesome and unwholesome ***dhammas***. All consciousness within fivefold doors have got ability to know the nature of mere striking towards fivefold objects, visible-object etc. It is explained in (***Abhi-A-2-388***). 

The righteous ***meditator*** should like to scrutinize these explanations of ***Pāli*** Text, commentary and sub-commentary. 

***Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-87) (Mahāţī-2-129, 130)*** 

In the sub-commentary called ***Mahāţīkā***, it is explained that the investigating mind moment arise to determine accepting object but not possess efficiency to determine object certainly. 

18. **wrong view group-Second impulsion-feeling aggregate (eye-door-cognitive process)** 
1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; second impulsion feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object  (=  visible  object)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (second  impulsion)  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First impulsion mind-contact (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Second impulsion  mind-contact (= 20 - feeling = 19) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Unwise  attention  (=  determining  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  second  impulsion  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE- 293** 

[**Notes**:  As  mental  ***dhammas***  of  first  impulsion  benefitts  mental  ***dhammas***  of  second impulsion  by  means  of  efficiency  of  relations  of  contiguity  etc,  mental  ***dhammas***  of preceding impulsion benefitts those of succeeding impulsion. ] 

19. **A.    Five aggregates of first registering after impulsion rooted in greed (E.D.C.P)** 
1. (54)  kinds  of  corporealities  within  the  heart  and  visible-objects  are  corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of registering, the feeling is feeling aggregate. 
PAGE39

3. Among (12) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of registering, the perception is perception aggregate. 
3. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  registering,  the  volition  is  formation aggregate. (First method) Among  (12)  kinds of  mental ***dhammas*** of registering, the remaining  (9)  kinds of mental concomitants is formation aggregate. (Second method) 
3. Among  (12)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  registering,  the  consciousness  is consciousness aggregate. 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

\*E.D.C.P = eye-door-cognitive process 

[**Notes**: \_\_\_\_\_ In this case rootless wholesome consequence joyful investigating registering is shown as example. If it is wholesome consequence or unwholesome consequence neutral investigating  registering,  there  will  be  (11)  kinds  of  mental  ***dhammas***.  If  it  is  great consequence registering, there will be (34/33/33/32) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** accordingly. 

**7.19. B First registering after impulsion rooted in greed-feeling aggregate (E.D.C.P)** Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= Heart base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Seven impulsion mind-contact (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 12 – feeling = 11) is causal ***dhammas***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE – 294** 

20. **Second registering after impulsion rooted in greed-feeling aggregate (E.D.C.P)** Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 
1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal ***dhamma***;  (second  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE42

4. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is  

resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) First registering mind-contact (=12) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Second  registering  mind-contact  (=12-feeling  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

So far as this extent, way of discerning on five aggregates of every mind moment of both  impulsions  rooted  in  greed  and  registering  can  be  understood.  In  the  mind-door cognitive  process,  way  of  discerning  on  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  of  mind-door adverting occurring in unwholesome group is the same as mind-door averting occurring in wholesome group. Now feeling aggregate of impulsion rooted in greed will be presented as example. 

21. **First impulsion rooted in greed-feeling aggregate (M.D.C.P)\*** 

Four Kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate  

is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2) Life  continuum  mind-contact  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) first impulsion mind-contact (= 20 - feeling = 19) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Unwise  attention  (=  mind-door-adverting  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion) feeling-aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 

M.D.C.P  = Mind-door-cognitive process 

22. **Second impulsion rooted in greed-feeling aggregate (M.D.C.P)** 

Four Kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Life continuum mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) first impulsion mind-contact (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) second  impulsion  mind-contact  (=  20  –  feeling  =  19)  is  causal  ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE41

4. Unwise attention (= mind-door-adverting = 12) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling-aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-295** 

So far as this extent, way of discerning on remaining mental aggregate can be understood. The righteous ***meditator*** should like to understand five aggregates of remaining impulsions, third impulsion etc. 

23. **First registering after impulsion rooted in greed\_\_\_ feeling aggregate (M.D.C.P)** Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 
1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Life-continuum  mind-contact  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Seven impulsion mind-contact (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 12 – feeling = 11) is causal ***dhammas***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

In this case rootless wholesome consequence joyful investigating registering is shown as example. Great consequence registering and neutral investigating registering should be discerned  by  taking  example  mentioned  above.  Among  (11)  kinds  of  registerings,  the ***meditator*** should like to discern any kind of registering which falls as it really is. 

**PAGE-296** 

24. **Second registering after impulsion rooted in greed-feeling aggregate (M.D.C.P)** Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 
1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal ***dhamma***;  (second  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

4. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registeringp)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= visible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Eye-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Life-continuum mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 12) is causal ***dhamma***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
   4) Second registering mind-contact (= 12 – feeling = 11) is causal ***dhammas***; (second registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**General Notes\_\_\_\_** 

Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** of every mind moment of eye-door cognitive process and  mind-door-cognitive  process  which  take  visible  object  and  fall  into  unwholesome impulsions,  greed-conceit  etc.,  must  be  kept  in  mind  thoroughly  by  following  examples shown in above sections. The righteous ***meditator*** should recognize every way of taking into heart in order to arise greed-conceit, anger, anger-envy, anger-avarice, anger-worry, skeptical doubt, is called unwise attention (***ayonisomanasikāra***). The righteous ***meditator*** should like to discern systematically by seeing arising of resultant ***dhammas***, due to causal ***dhammas*** of every mind moment as shown in tables of ***nāmakammaţţhāna***, ***Volume II.*** 

**Change in remaining lines** 

2. In audible-object line, visible-object is changed to audible-object; eye-contact is changed to ear contact. 
2. In olfactory-object line, in the place of object it changes to olfactory- object; in the place of contact it changes to nose-contact. 
2. In gustative-object line, in the place of object it changes to gustative-object; in the place of contact it changes to tongue-contact. 
2. In tactile-object line, in the place of object it changes to tactile-object; in the place of contact it changes to body-contact respectively. 

**PAGE-297** 

So far as this extent, every person who is learned in ***Abhidhamma*** can understand easily.  However  some  righteous  ***meditator***  can  not  understand  on  way  of  discerning  on remaining  doors.  Therefore  some  examples  for  remaining  doors,  ear-door  etc.,  will  be presented.  Wholesome  group,  wholesome  impulsions  will  be  presented  previously.  The important fact to be noticed previously is that every mind moment consisting in both ear- door-cognitive  process  and  mind-door-cognitive  process  which  takes  audible-object continuously must also be discerned thoroughly for keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas***.  

25. **B   Audible-object line-five-doors-adverting-feeling aggregate (Ear-door-cognitive process)** 
PAGE43

Three kinds of present-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Bhases (heart = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (five-doors-adverting) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Object ( = audible object) is causal ***dhamma***; (five-doors-adverting) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) ***bhavanga*** mind-contact ( = 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (five-doors-adverting) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b)  five-door-adverting  mind-contact  (11  –  feeling  =  10)  is  causal  ***dhamma***; (five-doors-adverting) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.25.E  Audible-object  line-five-doors-adverting  Consciousness  aggregate  (Ear-door- cognitive process)** 

**Two kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

1. ***bhavanga*** mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhammas***, (five-doors-adverting) consciousness aggregate is resultant ***dhammas***. 
1. Mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***,  (five-doors-adverting)  consciousness  aggregate  is resultant ***dhammas***. 

The term, ***nāma*** (mind), means (10) kinds of associating mental concomitants. The term,  ***rūpa***  (matter),  means  the  heart  base  together  with  (54)  kinds  of  corporeality  and audible-object. 

Remaining aggregates can be understood easily. 

**7.26.B  Audible-object line-hearing-consciousness feeling aggregate (Ear-door-cognitive process)** 

Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (hearing-consciousness)***  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (hearing-consciousness)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (hearing-consciousness)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (hearing-consciousness)***  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (hearing-consciousness)***  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-298** 

**Five kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= ear – base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= audible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Ear-contact (= 8-feeling =7) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Space is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Attention (= five-doors-adverting = 11) are causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.27.B Audible-object line-Receiving-feeling aggregate (Ear-door-cognitive process)** 

Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE46

3. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Formation (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
3. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= audible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Ear-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b) Receiving mind-contact (=11 – feeling = 10) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.27.D(ii) Audible - object line – Receiving - formation aggregate (Ear-door-cognitive** 

**process)** 

**(‘8’ mental concomitants must be inferred as formation aggregate, Second method)** 

Ways  of  discerning  shown  in  number  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7  are  the  same  as  feeling aggregate. Difference will be presented. 8.  Contact  (a) Ear-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (receiving) formation aggregate is 

`     `resultant ***dhamma***. 

(b)  Remaining  (3)  mental  aggregated  are  causal  ***dhamma***;  (receiving) formation aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE -299** 

**7.27.E   Audible-object  line-  Receiving-consciousness  aggregate  (Ear-door-cognitive process)** 

Ways of discerning shown in number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are the same as feeling aggregate.  **Two kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

6. Ear-contact  (=8)  is  causal  ***dhammas***;  (receiving)  consciousness  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhammas***. 
6. Receiving  mind-matter  are  causal  ***dhammas***;  (receiving)  consciousness  aggregate  is resultant ***dhammas***. 

The term, mind (***nāma***), means (10) kinds of mental concomitants associating with receiving consciousness; 

The term, matter(***rūpa***), means (54) kinds of depended base corporealities and audible object. 

**7.28.B Audible-object line-Investigating-feeling aggregate (Ear-door-cognitive process)** 

Five kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Craving (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Clinging (= 20) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)***  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE45

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= audible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Ear-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (investigating) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Receiving  mind-contact  (=11)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (investigating)  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Investigating  mind-contact  (  =12  –  feeling  =  11)  is  causal  ***dhammas***; (investigating) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**PAGE-300** 

**7.29.B  Audible-object line\_\_\_ First wholesome impulsion feeling-aggregate (Ear-door-**

**cognitive process)** 

Four kinds of present causal ***dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object  (=  audible  object)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  impulsion)  feeling  aggregate  is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Ear-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

   2) First impulsion mind-contact (34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Wise attention (= determining = 12) is causal ***dhamma***; (first impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.30.B.  Audible-object line- Second wholesome impulsion feeling aggregate (Ear-door- cognitive process)** 

**Four kinds of present causal *dhammas*** 

1. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***.  
1. Object (= audible object) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion)  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Contact (a) Ear-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First impulsion mind-contact (=34) is causal ***dhamma***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Second impulsion  mind-contact ( =34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; (second impulsion) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
4. Wise  attention  (=  determining  =  12)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (second  impulsion)  feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**7.31. B Audible-object line\_\_\_\_ First registering-feeling aggregate (Ear-door-cognitive process)** 

Three kinds of past-causal ***dhammas***, 

1. Ignorance  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE47

2. Craving  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Clinging  (=  20)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Formation  (=  34)  is  causal  ***dhamma***;  (first  registering)***  feeling  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering)*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal *dhammas***. 

6. Base (= heart-base = 6 = 54) is causal ***dhamma***;*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Object (= audible object) is causal ***dhamma***; feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
6. Contact (a) Ear-contact ( = 8) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) Seven impulsion mind-contact (= 34) is causal ***dhamma***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
2) First registering mind-contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhammas***; (first registering) feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE47
