***Namo tassabhagavato arahato sammāsambhuddhassa*** 

NIBBĀNA GĀMINIPAṭIPADĀ 

**WAY OF PRACTICE LEADING TO NIBBĀNA** 

**VOLUME III Page 201 - 250** 

**BY** 

**PA-AUK TAWYA SAYADAW** 

**TRANSLATED BY** 

***AÑÑATARA BHIKKHU* (ASHIN ÑĀ*ŅAGAVESAKA)*** 

**PAGE-201** 

30. **Disadvantage which can be** attain**ed** 

If there will be single occurrence through connecting of continuity of corporeality- mentality between causal ***dhammas*** and resultant ***dhammas*** (= if it is ***ekatta***), the curd which is anterior allotment can not be produced from the milk which is posterior allotment. (It means two kinds of condition, milk and curd can not occur, due to single occurrence.) If it is, actually, different occurrence (=if it is ***nānatta***), there is no interrelationship between the curd and milk. It should be recognized on all kinds of causal ***dhammas***, all kinds of resultant ***dhammas*** which are produced by causal ***dhammas*** in this way. ***(Abhi-A-2-155)*** 

If there are certain single occurrence (***ekanta ekatta***) and certain different occurrence (***ekanta  nānattā***)  in  this  way,  every  worldly  usage  will  be  disappeared  (***sabbaloka vohāralopa***). That disappearance of every worldly usage is also not worth desiring. Therefore the  knowledge  is  not  worth  approaching  to  either  certain  single  occurrence  or  certain different occurrence. It should be recognized in this way. 

The phrases, “***sabbaloka vohāralopa***”, means disappearance of every worldly usage. If   there  will  be  certain  single  occurrence  of  causal  ***dhammas***,  action  etc.,  and  various consequence  consciousness  which  are  produced  by  causal  ***dhammas***,  the  person  who  is existing in human never reach into destination of heavenly being. If there will be certain different occurrence, the resultant ***dhamma***, which is commensurate with action, never arise in the continuum of person with apparent action (***kamma***). (It means the continuity in which action was performed is different from other continuity in which consequence arises.) 

It means that if it is either single occurrence or different occurrence in causal an resultant ***dhammas*** in that way, a kind of usage, such as, “once upon a time I had become a hermit called ***rohitassa***”, can not be occurred. Why is it? If it is unique only, the usage “once upon a tine and I” can not be occurred. If it is different ones, the usage “once upon a time and I” can not be occurred, due to presence of specific occurrence between ***rohitassa*** hermit and now  I  am.  Therefore  it  means  that  every  worldly  usage,  such  as  “Ratta’s  sees,  Ratta’s resultant ***dhamma***” etc., can be disappeared. 

During  arising  the  resultant  ***dhamma***,  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  through  causal ***dhammas***, action etc., of previous existence the knowledge is not worth approaching to either single  occurrence  (***ekattā***)  or  different  occurrence  (***nānattā***)  really,  due  to  presence  of connection  between  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  through  continuity  of  corporeality- mentality. (***Mūlaṭī-2-112***) 

**PAGE-202** 

***Pāli Quotation*** (***Mūlaṭī-2-112***) 

In these, single occurrence, and different occurrence, this eternity wrong view called “both agreeable feeling and disagreeable feeling had been done by I, myself,” is prohibited through prohibiting certain single occurrence. (In the nature of cause and result which are connecting each other through continuity of corporeality-mentality, both kinds are ***anicca*** ***dhammas*** and are not single ***dhamma***, resulting in inability to do agreeable and disagreeable feelings  through  only  one.  Both  causal  ***dhammas***  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  are  piles  of corporeality-mentality and ***anicca*** ***dhamma*** but not person, being. Due to finishing to prohibit eternity wrong view called “that person does; that person only feels”, it is explained that this eternity wrong view called “both agreeable feeling and disagreeable feeling had been done by 
Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE44

I, myself,” is prohibited through prohibiting certain single occurrence. ***(Multi-2-112, Anuṭī-2- 125, 126)*** 

This annihilation view which believes that “both agreeable feeling and disagreeable feeling  had  been  done  by  other”,  is  prohibited  through  prohibiting  certain  different occurrence of causes and results. The annihilation view which believes that “doer is one, the person who feels is other”, is also prohibited. 

Those views, ***adhiccasamuppannavāda*** by which one believes that “both agreeable and disagreeable feelings arise automatically without any cause”, and ***niyatisabhāva vāda*** by which one believes that  “those  are always occurring naturally”, have been prohibited by saying presence of causal ***dhammas***, presence of resultant ***dhammas*** which are produced by causal ***dhammas***. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-112, Anuṭī-2-126***) 

31. **The fact to be questioned** 

In  this  case  there  is  reasonable  question.  If  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  is  present apparently in new existence without transferring from previous existence, due to presence of both phenomena, i.e., “occurrence of cessation of aggregates which are existing in this self- identity of human and the action which will produce its consequence in next existence never go to that next existence”\_\_\_\_\_ is it not true that in the continuum of another person other than the person who does action the resultant ***dhamma*** can arise due to the action which had been done by other? (It means the person who does action is one, the person who feels result of that action is another one; both persons are different ones.) If the person, who is capable of feeling on the result of action, is absent, how that resultant ***dhamma*** can arise in whose continuum? Therefore one reproves in a way that “this kind of decision which has been said that it is not worth reaching to either certain single occurrence or certain different occurrence is not so good.” 

The inquisitor’s opinion is that\_\_\_\_\_ if ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness does not transfer from  previous  existence  to  new  existence,  due  to  cessation  of  aggregates  in  previous existence,  and  due  to  lack  of  going  (reaching)  of  the  action  which  is  cause  of  resultant ***dhammas***, ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness etc., to the place where result of new existence arises, resulting in “the person who does action is one, the person who feels on sequence of action is another one”, does that result arise for another person but not the person who does action? 

**PAGE-203** 

Such action is performed in present existence; due to lack of going of that action also, does the result, new existence arise through another action which is different from the action which has been performed? Due to presence of saying that \_\_\_\_\_ 

***rūpārūpadhammamattam uppajjamānam bhavantaramupeti (Vs-2-186)*** 

- Only piles of corporeality-mentality ***dhammas*** are still arising and reaching into the 

next existence”, and then it is said that “***na satto na jīvo***” = neither being nor living self approaches to the next existence, if not only piles of ***dhammas*** are unable to feel but being, living self which are also unable to feel the consequence, who will feel that consequence, new existence? If the person who feels is absent, for whom that resultant ***dhamma*** also arise? It, therefore, means this kind of decision that “it is not worth reaching to either certain single occurrence or certain different occurrence” is not so good. 

***santāne yam phalam etam, nāññassa na ca aññatto.*** 

***vījānam abhisankhāro, etassatthassa sādhako. (Abhi-A-2-155)*** 
PAGE3

When one reproves in this way the wise virtuous person should like to answer in a way that the action ***dhamma*** arose apparently in continuity of aggregate called pile of such ***dhammas***; when the consequence of action arises apparently in the same (single) continuity of aggregate called that pile of ***dhammas***, due to occurrence of prohibiting to certain single occurrence,  certain  different  occurrence  in  the  continuity  of  aggregate  called  that  same (single) pile of ***dhammas*** in which is the action arises, it is not worth saying that either “that consequence arises in the continuum of another person who is not the person who performs action or that consequence arises through another action which is not the action which was performed himself, in the next method, that consequence arises through the action which had been performed by others. “ The meaning of saying which has been said as above can be accomplished by simile of improving of seeds. 

**Way of improvement**\_\_\_\_ Mango seed must be permeated with semi-solid of ***catumadhura*** (=electuary made of four ingredients, i.e., sesame oil, molasses, honey, butter) in order to grow mango tree with fruits which are more sweeter than fruits of the first generation. Sweety liquids must be poured on mango seesd. Pomelo seed must be permeated with lacliquid in order  to  become  red  segment,  flesh  of  pomelo  fruit.  This  kind  of  permeation  is  called improvement of seeds. (***Mūlaṭī***-***2-112, Mahāṭī-2-315***) 

There is also way of permeation, on the other hand, so as not to be flavourable fruits. For instance\_\_\_\_\_ It is said in ***Dadhivāhana Jātaka, Duka Nipāta*** that if a kind of climber,  

***Dregea volubilis \_\_\_\_\_*** is grown up near mango tree, flavour of fruit of that mango tree can be turned bad. 

***mātulunga***\_\_\_\_\_  The  term,  ***mātulunga***,  is  translated  as  lemon,  ***Citrus  lemon***,  by  most Myanmar  translators.  However  the  Most  Venerable  ***Mahāsi  Sayadaw***  suggested  in Translation of ***Mahāṭkā***, as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

These saying of sub-commentary are done by ***Mūlaṭīkā*** Sayadaw. In these saying, due to  showing  the  fact  the  fruit  called  ***mātulunga***  has  got  red  segments,  juicy  flesh,  it  is, actually,  pomelo  fruit,  ***Citrus  decumana***,  according  to  olden  day  teacher  of  Sri  Lanka. (***Mahāṭīkā*** ***Nissaya-4-115***) 

**PAGE-204** 

Thus when improvement of seeds, seed of mango etc., has been accomplished and then  the  significant  result  called  fruit  occurs  at  the  period  which  is  different  from  the improving period, due to presence of supporting  factor as  acquired  improvement in the continuity of that seed that fruit is not resulted from other seed but from mango seed etc.. That  result  called  sweet  mango  fruit  does  not  arise  depending  on  the  cause  called improvement  of  other  seed. Neither  those  seeds  nor those performances  of  improvement reach.  Similarly  it  should  be  understood  this  object  of  comparison  which  can  finish  the meaning without error. ***(Abhi-A-2-155, 156)*** 

In these words- 

1. the person who has got action (***kamma***) is similar to seed, 
1. the action is similar to improvement of seed, 
1. continuity of aggregates, ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness etc., is similar to continuity of seed, sprout, stem, foliage etc., 
1. the phenomenon of arising of result in the continuum of only being who performs action and it is resulted from that action, is similar to the phenomenon of arising of red sweet segment or sweet fruit which arises in the continuity of corporeality of tree, 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE66

such as sprout, stem etc., and it is resulted from only that seed and only improvement of that seed. (***Mūlaṭī-2-112, 113)*** 

One  has  got  learning,  skill  and  oratory  technique  as  childhood;  one  subsists  on medicines  for  health  as  childhood;  those  learning,  skill,  oratory  technique  which  has accomplished in childhood, and subsisting on medicine do not follow with matured body; even though it is not following in that way both occurrence of sharpness and mastery of various techniques, oratory technique etc., and occurrence of healthy condition arise in the matured body depending on learning techniques and subsisting medicines. (It can be said practicing makes perfect.) These resultant ***dhammas*** never occur in continuum of others. It is because  those  resultant  ***dhammas***  arise  only  matured  body  which  is  inclusive  in  the continuity  of  corporeality-mentality  at  which  learning  technique  and  subsisting  medicine since childhood. 

Furthermore\_\_\_\_\_ Those resultant ***dhammas*** never arise depending on other causes in the absence of such and such learning, skill, oratory technique, which have been practiced and  subsisting  medicine  etc.,  It  is  because  if  those  factors  are  unavailable,  sharpness  of knowledge in those technologies, skill and health etc., are absent really. 

Similarly  during  arising  of  ***paṭisandhi***  consciousness  through  this  action  such resultant  ***dhamma***  is  present  in  the  continuity  of  corporeality-mentality;  this  resultant ***dhamma***  never  arise  in  the  continuum  of  others  and  it  is  not  resulted  from  the  action performed by others. It should be yoked in this kind of meaning. 

**PAGE-205** 

Furthermore\_\_\_\_\_ with regarding to these words, “***na aññato*** = it is not resulted from the action performed by others”, it shows the fact if causal conditioned things ***dhammas*** are absent, only consequence consciousness, ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness etc., which are resultant ***dhammas*** are absent. It should be recognized it does not prohibit other causal ***dhammas*** (called destination, personality, time, instigation). (***Mūlaṭī-2-113***) 

32. **The person who feels consequence** 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Abhi-A\_2-156)*** 

With regarding to the preaching that “there is no person, being who can feel”, person, being have been rejected. If it is so, for whom that resultant ***dhamma*** which is produced by causal ***dhammas***, action etc, arises? Answer – As one can said the fact that the tree fruits, or the tree has got fruit, due to occurrence of only fruit which is partial of successive continuity of corporealities with the nutriment as eighth factor, which are produced by temperature, of the tree which is designated in the aspect of conventional reality, similarly one can say the fact that either heavenly being or human being can feel; he has got happiness or suffering, due  to  occurrence  of  fruit  called  happiness,  suffering;  which  is  deserving  to  say  as pleasurable sense; which is partial of corporeality-mentality, aggregates which are designated as heavenly being, human being in the aspect of conventional reality. Therefore any kind of resultant ***dhammas***, person, being who are able to feel, can not be present in this single continuity of aggregate out of arising of resultant ***dhammas***. It should be recognized in this way. ***(Abhi-A-2-156)*** 

[There is neither person nor being who is able to feel but only corporeality-mentality which are occurring as causal ***dhammas***, action etc., and resultant ***dhammas*** in the single continuity  of  aggregates.  It  means  that  when  resultant  corporeality-mentality  arise  the designation as “person who can feel” is finished automatically. In the next method – As the 
PAGE5

usage,  “doer”  occurs  through  saying  as  “***puññam  karoti***  =  wholesome  deed  is  done, ***apuññam karoti*** = unwholesome deed is done” when wholesome volition, unwholesome volition arise in the single continuity of corporeality-mentality, aggregate, similarly\_\_\_\_\_ it means that the designation as ‘person who can feel” is finished automatically through saying as “***sukham anubhavati*** = agreeable feeling is felt, ***dukkham*** ***anubhavati*** = disagreeable feeling is felt,” when resultant ***dhammas*** of those wholesome, unwholesome arise apparently. (***Mahāṭī-2-315***)] 

It should be recognized there is no effectiveness to search person, being who can feel. 

**PAGE-206** 

33. **Presence or absence of formation *dhammas*** 

A heretic said as follows again. – Do causal ***dhammas*** of the result arise through either  in  the presence  of  these  formation ***dhammas***  which  are  capable  of producing  this consequence  consciousness,  as  three-time-phases  called  ***uppāda-ṭhiti-bhanga***  or  in  the absence of these formation ***dhammas***? 

If causal ***dhammas*** of the result arise through in the presence of formation ***dhammas*** as  three-time-phases  called  ***uppāda-ṭhiti-bhanga***,  it  will  reach  to  the  saying  that  during arising moment of formations consequence of those formation arise simultaneously. If causal ***dhammas*** of the result arise through in the absence of formation ***dhammas*** as three-time- phases, it will reach to the saying that formations always bring forth results at either previous to arising moment or later (=after maturity to produce result). The person with the right opinion of the Supreme Buddha’s teaching should like to answer as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

***katattā paccayā ete, na ca niccam phalāvahā.*** 

***pāṭibhogādikam tattha, veditabbam nidassanam. (Abhi-A-2-156)*** 

Due to occurrence of achievement of formations, causal ***dhammas*** of one’s resultant ***dhammas*** can arise. Causes of the result can not benefit for arising of result through either in the presence or in the absence of formations. 

***kāmāvacarassa  kusalassa  kammassa  katattā  upacitattā  vipākam  cakkhu  viññāņam uppannamhoti. (Abhi-1-104)*** 

Resultant ***dhamma***, seeing-consciousness arises apparently through three-time-phases called ***uppāda-ṭhiti-bhanga***, due to accomplishment of sensual wholesome action only. ***(Abhi-1-04)*** 

The  Exalted  One  preached  these  words.  Furthermore  after  causal  ***dhammas***  of respective resultant ***dhammas*** arise appropriately those causal ***dhammas*** never bring forth results again because results are already accomplished to be produced. 

If one purchases stocks, he has to pay price of stocks. If one loans money, he has to repay a debt with interest. Therefore the manner of purchasing stocks reaches to the manner of promising  to pay  its price;  the  manner  of buying  on  credit  reaches  to  the  manner  of promising to repay debt. Only the manner of promising of that person is the reason to repay debt, but presence or absence of that manner, promising, is not essential at that moment. 

**PAGE-207** 

Similarly those formations called action (***kamma***) also occur as causal ***dhammas*** of resultant ***dhammas***, due to occurrence of accomplishment of formations. Furthermore, after 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE88

appropriate  giving  rise  to  occur  results  it  never  bring  forth  result  again.  It  should  be recognized in this way. ***(Abhi-A-2-188, 189)*** 

Formations called actions are unable to exist continuously as action in the continuity of aggregates after giving rise to occur appropriate results; as the person who promises to repay a debt does not carry out responsibility after repaying debt-those action which had given rise to occur results do not carry out responsibility to produce its result again. Although it is explained that “a kind of action called ***aprāpariyavedaniya*** ***kamma*** can give rise to occur result from the third coming-into-existence as beginning until attainment of ***nibbāna***, if one counts existences from the existence in which action is performed as beginning, it can follow until the existence in which ***nibbāna*** is attained only when respective result is not given rise to occur. It should be recognized if respective result has been given rise to occur, it can not follow upto the existence in which ***nibbāna*** is attained. However during performing a kind of action numerous volitions can arise in billion times with three kinds called ***pubbaceatanā*** (= volition which arises before performing action), ***muñcacetanā*** (= volition which arises during performing action), ***aparacetanā*** (= volition which arises after performing action). Among those numerous volitions it should be recognized the fact even though those volitions which have finished to give rise to occur result do not produce result again remaining volitions which do not finish to produce result can give rise to occur result in appropriate coming-into- existence, if opportunity is available. 

34. **Five kinds of *samangitā* (factors of** fulfil**ment)** 

Five kinds of factors of fulfilment called ***samangitā*** should also be understood in the section of causal ***dhammas*** called action. The person who has fulfiled with any kind of action is  called  ***samangī***.  Those  ***dhammas***  of  factors  which  plays  essential  important  role  in occurrence of the person called ***samangī*** is designated as ***samangitā***. There are five kinds of ***samangitā***, viz., 

1. ***āyūhanasamangitā*** 
1. ***cetanāsamangitā*** 
1. ***kammasamagitā*** 
1. ***vipākasamangitā*** 
1. ***upaṭṭhānasamangitā***. 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Abhi-A-2-419)* PAGE-208** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-419, 420) (Mūlaṭī-2-210) (Anutī-2-211)*** 

It  will  be  explicit  on  those  five  kinds  of  ***samangitā***  in  sequence,  except ***vipākasamangitā*** as last one in order to understand way of practice profoundly. 

1) ***āyūhanasamangitā***  \_\_\_\_\_  By  the  time  wholesome  or  unwholesome  action  is performed, it is called ***āyūhanasamangitā*** (= occurrence of the person with endeavour to ***fulfil*** action). 
1) ***cetanāsamgitā***\_\_\_\_\_ By the time wholesome or unwholesome action is performed, it is  ***cetanāsamangitā***  (=  occurrence  of  the  person  with  fulfilment  of  wholesome volition or unwholesome volition). ***(Abhi-A-2-419)*** 

It should be recognized on those terms that ***āyūhanasamangitā*** means continuity of mind which arises through endeavouring before action is performed, in the next method, 
PAGE7

through relating to endeavour the action, while ***cetanāsamangitā*** means the fulfilment of volition,  in  the  next  method,  the  volition  which  arises  relating  to  definite  volition (***sanniṭṭhānacetanā***) 

In the next method, during performing  any  kind of action the continuity of mind which  arises  by  means  of  continuity  present  (***santatipaccuppanna***)  is  called ***āyūhanasamangitā***,  while  the  arising  moment  of  volitions  called  ***muncacetanā***  (during performing action), ***pubbacetanā*** (before performing action), ***aparacetanā*** (after performing action),  which  are  occurring  through  momentary  present  (***khaņapaccuppanna***),  is  called ***cetanāsamangitā***. ***(Mūlaṭī-2-210, Anuṭī-2-211)*** 

[Notes: In some scriptures both kinds of ***āyūhanasamangitā*** and ***cetanāsamangitā*** are designated as synonym and shown as a single name ***āyūhanasamangitā***.] 

3) ***kammasamangitā*** \_\_\_\_\_ All kinds of beings who are existing throughout the period until reaching to the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant are worth designating as persons with fulfilment of action with referring to those potential actions which had been cultivated previously; the occurrence of person  with fulfilment of  action is called ***kammasamangitā***. ***(Abhi-A-2-419) Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-3-374) (Mūlaṭī-3-189)*** 

**PAGE-209** 

The term, ***kammapaccaya*** (= the relation of action), means the causal ***dhamma*** called relation  of  asynchronous  actions  which  had  been  cultivated  in  numerous  previous  aeons which are potential to produce its results. Those volitions which had occurred in different moment from arising moment of result are the relations of asynchronous action. 

Wholesome or unwholesome action never give rise to occur its result at the same moment of itself. If the former can give rise to occur the latter at the same moment, -- a human who performs such wholesome action which can give rise to become existence of heavenly being, will become male deva or female deva during  cultivating action, due to efficiency of that wholesome action. 

If  it  is  said  appropriately  –  At  such  moment  that  action  has  been  cultivated;  at asynchronous moment, other than that moment of cultivated action, due to occurrence of fulfilment of action, even though it is not present in three-time-phases called ***uppāda***-***ṭhiti***- ***bhanga***, that action can give rise to occur resultant ***dhamma*** in any lives, i.e., 

1. present live which can be experienced in present, if it is ***diṭṭhadhamma vedanīya kamma***; 
1. second life which is the next coming-into-existence, if it is ***upapajjavedanīyakamma***; 
1. those  coming-into-existences  which  are  deserving  to  reach,  excluding present  and second  life,  if  it  is  ***aprapriyavedanīyakamma***;  when  remaining  causal  ***dhammas*** (called destination, personality, time, instigation) are united apparently. 

For instance – during benefiting through foundation as preceding learning technology benefits  for  improvement  of  succeeding  learning  technology  asynchronously,  the  volition called  action  does  not benefit  for  arising  of  resultant ***dhamma***  at  cultivating  moment  (= arising moment through three-time-phases called ***uppāda***-***ṭhiti***-***bhanga***) but asynchronously only. It should, therefore, be designated as relation of asynchronous action ***(nānākkhaņika kammapaccaya). (Abhi-A-3-374)*** 

Although wholesome volition, unwholesome  volition are unable to produce resultant ***dhammas*** synchronously, those embedded efficiency of action which is potential to produce resultant in the continuity of corporeality-mentality. According to explanation, “***kammassa samatthatā tassa kammapaccayabhāvo***”, found in ***Mūla Tīkā***, only the efficiency which is potential to produce result is the relation of action for arising of that resultant ***dhamma***. In 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE10

this  case  presence  or  absence  through  three-time-phases  called  ***uppāda***-***ṭhiti***-***bhanga***  of cultivated wholesome volition, unwholesome volition is not significant essence. 

**PAGE-210** 

Due to fulfilment of action, the presence of only efficiency which is potentiality to produce result plays vital important role in this case, the relation of action. 

In present period the righteous ***meditator*** is also the person with fulfilment of action called ***kammasamangitā*** who had got cultivated wholesome action unwholesome action in previous existences. As the wheel always follows the foot of the draught bullock as one’s shadow always follows the man wherever he goes that action which is fulfiled completely always  follows  oneself.  However  those  cultivated  actions  in  previous  existences  are  not heavy action which are impotential to produce results. They always follow oneself so as to give rise to produce result depending on completion or incompletion with time, destination, personality, instigation. (See detailed in ***Abhi-A-2-421, 434***) 

Those virtuous wise persons with foresight, therefore, cultivate wholesome action in present life in order to become powerful in efficiency, resulting in unopportunity to produce results of unwholesome actions. They endeavour to obtain sublime heavy actions through developing  ***samatha***  practices.  Those  virtuous  person  who  have  got  great  knowledge  of dreadfulness endeavour both ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practices strenuously in order to cease the cycle of rounds of rebirth called ***paṭiccasamuppāda*** in this very life. In the continuums of those practicing persons unwholesome actions become fruitless actions called ***ahosikamma*** which are un-opportunity to produce results, due to presence of successive potentiality to produce results of wholesome actions. If one reaches to the Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant, every old action, wholesome or unwholesome one is eradicated absolutely and every new action, wholesome or unwholesome one, never arise again. As burning light of open oil lamp extinguishes, fire of suffering of rounds of rebirth also extinguishes after the final death of Arahant. 

4) ***upaṭṭhānasamangitā***  \_\_\_\_\_  When  all  beings  have  got  new  coming-into-existence after  death  of  various  lives  throughout  the  period  before  reaching  to  the  Fruit- Knowledge of Arahant any kind of three objects called action, emblem of action, emblem  of  destination  usually  appears  at  the  moment  adjacent  to  death,  due  to efficiency  of  action  which  is  potential  to  produce  new  coming-into-existence  as natural fixed law. 
1) If one will become denizen of hell, the emblem of hell, fire, cauldron filled with molten metal etc., will appear; 
1) if  one  will  become  human  existence  in  the  mother’s  womb,  the  emblem  of destination, mother’s womb, will appear; 
1) if one will become heavenly existences, emblem of destination, the tree of plenty (comparable to the mythical cornucopia), edifice etc., will appear. 

Thus the emblem of establishment of ***paṭisandhi*** usually appears at moribund period. Due to occurrence of inevitability to appear object of factor of establishment of ***paṭisandhi***, it is called ***upaṭṭhāna*** ***samangitā*** (= occurrence of the person with fulfilment of appearance of object).  

**PAGE-211** 

5) ***vipākasamangitā*** – In the continuum of the person with fulfilment of appearance of object impulsions adjacent to death fall by taking any object of those three kinds, 
PAGE9

which appears at moribund period. The ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness of new coming- into-existence  arises  contiguously  after  death-consciousness  by  taking  only  object which is taken by impulsions adjacent to death. By the time those consequences, ***paṭisandhi***-consciousness etc., are arising is called ***vipakasamangitā*** (= occurrence of the person with fulfilment of consequence). ***(Abhi-A-2-419, 420)*** 

35. **Change of emblems** 

Among those (5)  kinds of ***samangitā***, ***upaṭṭhāna*** ***samangitā*** (= occurrence of the person with fulfilment of appearance of object) can change but remaining four kinds can not change. 

Even though emblem of hell appears, emblem of heavenly world, in turn, can change and  appear  and  vice  versa.  Even  though  emblem  of  human  world  appears,  emblem  of destination of animal, in turn, can change and appear and vice versa. ***(Abhi-A-2-420, 421)*** 

Phenomenon of change of these emblems never occur at the moribund period but only those  emblems  which  appear  vicinity  of  moribund  period  can  change  depending  on appropriate  factors,  wise  attention  etc.  By  the  time  impulsions  adjacent  to  death  fall,  no emblem can change into other kind. 

It  is  explained  in  ***Abhi***-***A-2-420,  421***  the  fact  that  even  though  emblem  of  hell appeared in the continuum of an old ***bhikkhu*** who was a father of venerable ***Soņa Thero***, a ***dhamma***  preacher,  stayed  in  ***Acela***  Mountain  Monastery,  foot  of  ***Soņa***  Mountain,  at moribund period he was able to take the object of emblem of offering flowers to the pagoda   made by his son, resulting in changing and appearing as emblem of heavenly sphere. 

Due  to  ability  to  change  in  emblems  in  this  way,  the  practicing  ***meditator***  who scrutinizes past causal ***dhammas*** usually does not find definite action called ***janaka*** ***kamma*** which  can  produce  ***paṭisandhi***  consequence  definitely  but  supporting  action  called ***upaṭṭhambhaka***  ***kamma***  previously  sometimes.  During  scrutinizing past  causal ***dhammas*** difference between those emblems which are appearing in the mind-door before impulsions adjacent to death and impulsions adjacent to death can be occurred, due to discerning on objects which were occurring in the past continuity of mentality before moribund period. Sometimes  those  potential  actions  which  will  produce  results  usually  occur  hurriedly  at moribund period, as cows come out hurriedly at the entrance of farm when it is opened. Various kinds of emblems can appear at the vicinity of moribund period, due to efficiency of those  various  actions.  At  that  time  supporting  action  can  be  found  previously  and  then definite action called ***janaka*** ***kamma*** can be found later when he scrutinizes again. 

**PAGE-212** 

Furthermore objects of emblems which appear in the mind-door before impulsions adjacent to death can be varied depending on efficiency of actions. Sometimes the object which is the same as object of impulsions adjacent to death usually appears in the mind-door beforehand. It is similar to the emblem of six chariots of six heavenly planes which appeared in the mind-door of ***Dhammika***, a famous Buddhist lay devotee at moribund period. Among those six chariots came from six heavenly planes, when that gentleman choiced to be born in ***Tusitā*** plane only emblem of chariot of ***Tusitā*** plane appeared at the moribund period finally. 

**PAGE-213*** **6.  Four kinds of *atthanaya* (ways of alluding)** 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE12

In  this  section  the  righteous  person  has  to  understand  beforehand  four  kinds  of ***atthanaya***  (ways  of  alluding)  which  is  important  part  in  way  of  discerning  dependent- origination. There are four kinds, viz., (1) ***ekatta*** way (2) ***nanatta*** way (3) ***avyāpāra*** way (4) ***evamdhammatā*** way in this cycle of existence. 

The term, ***attanaya***, means\_\_\_\_\_ 

The principles of ignorance etc., are designated as ***atthanaya***, due to occurrence of principles  which  are  worth  understanding  through  alluding  of  knowledge  of  practicing ***meditator***. In the next methods\_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to formations etc., are arising in the single continuity of aggregates, even though they are not single, the way of alluding called ***ekatanaya*** is the factor to understand that “those principles are single, continuous phenomena”. 

The way of alluding called ***nānattanaya*** is the factor to understand that “principles of ignorance etc., are not single but varied phenomena”. 

The way of alluding called ***avyāpāra*** is the factor to understand that “ignorance etc., have no endeavour for arising of formations etc.” 

The way of alluding called ***evamdhammatā*** is the factor to understand that “even though there is no endeavour the ignorance has efficiency to arise formation as natural fixed law.” 

In this way, due to occurrence of factor to understand by the insight of ***meditator*** who is  discerning  on  principle  of  dependent-origination,  those  four  ways  of  alluding  are designated  as  ***atthanaya***.  It  means  it  is  the  principle  which  can  be  understood  through alluding of ***meditator***’s insight. ***(Mūlaṭī-2-131)*** 

__6.1 *Ekatanaya* (way of alluding as single) *Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-188*__*)* 

Seed  grows  into  sprout;  sprout  grows  into  leaf.  Due  to  continuous  processes  of development of that seed to stalk, stem, foliage etc., it can be said the seed develops into tree. Therefore  the  continuity  of  corporeality  of  seed  to  tree  is  incessant  phenomena,  due  to continuous  occurrence  of  corporealities produced by  temperature.  As  a  rope  made  up  of coconut fiber the continuity of corporeality is not discontinuous. 

**PAGE-214** 

As it can be said “single rope”, due to presence of continuous one, similarly during cascade of processes occurring in a way that due to presence of ignorance, formations arise; due to formations, consciousness arises; etc., causes and results are continuous through continuity of corporeality-mentality and then the way of alluding which is worth understanding as “single continuity”, is designated as ***ekatanaya. (Abhi-A-2-188, Vs-2-220)*** 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Mūlaṭī-2-131) (Anuṭī-2-140)*** 

1) It  is  very  difficult  to  understand  the  nature  of  varieties  (***nānatta***)  of  mental constituents  (***nāmakāya***)  (=  all  mental  ***dhammas***),  due  to  presence  of  contiguity (absence of interval) between cessation of preceding mental ***dhammas*** and arising of succeeding mental ***dhammas***; and 
1) After one corporeal unit arises the next one also arises again before previous one ceases. Corporealities produced by mind are always arising at every three-time-phases of mind moment continuously. Corporealities produced by mind are always arising at every arising phase (***uppāda*** ***khaņa***) of mind; corporealities produced by temperature 
PAGE11

are  always  arising  at  every  static  phase  of  corporeality;  if  the  nutriment  within ***kabaļīkāraāhāra*** is available, those kinds of nutriments, i.e., nutriment produced by ***kamma***, nutriment produced by mind, nutriment produced by temperature, nutriment produced by nutriment which occurs previously, can give rise to occur new corporeal units with nutriment as eighth factor. Because those arising corporealities have got life-span, (17) times of mind-moments the next corporeal unit arises before cessation of former corporeal unit. In other words\_\_\_\_\_ Next numerous corporeal units arises continuously  before  cessation  of  previous  ones.  Due  to  presence  of  continuous occurrence of corporealities through connecting between each other, it is also very difficult to understand the nature of varieties of corporeal constituents (***rūpa kāya***) (= all corporeal ***dhammas***). 

3) Due to presence of mutual dependence on each other, it is very difficult to understand the nature of varieties of both kinds of corporeality-mentality. 

The  nature  of  varieties  (***nānatta***)  means  that  \_\_\_\_\_  mental  ***dhammas***  also  arise collectively within one mind-moment called mental unit in which (11), (8), (12), (34) kinds of nature etc., are included. Each mental ***dhamma*** within corporeal unit has got specific nature but varied in each other. Those significance variations called specific nature of each mental ***dhamma*** within one mind moment is called ***nānatta***. Varieties of corporeal ***dhammas***, i.e., (8), (9), (10) kinds of etc., also arise and perish away similarly within each corporeal unit.  Each  corporeal  ***dhamma***  within  each  corporeal  unit  also  has  got  specific  nature. Significant variation of specific nature of those corporeal ***dhammas*** is called ***nanatta***. 

**PAGE-215** 

That nature of varieties is, indeed, very difficult to be known and seen by insight knowledge. Due to difficulty to be known and seen in that way, the continuity of causes and results  which  is  connecting  each  other  through  a  single  chain  without  breaking  down corporeal and mental compactness becomes well expanded nature, in accordance with the explanation that “***sammātānoti santāno***”, with the result that it is designated as Santana (= continuity). The occurrence of that incessant continuity is called ***ekatta*** (= single continuity). ***(Anuṭī-2-140)*** 

During apparent arising of resultant ***dhamma***, due to causal ***dhamma***, in a way that “due to presence of ignorance, formations arise; due to presence of formations, consciousness arises etc.”, because continuity of corporeality-mentality occurs as single line through cause and  result,  the  way  of  alluding  by  which  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  are  worth understanding as “single continuity” is called ***ekatanaya. (Anuṭī-2-140)*** 

The seed grows upto tree through incessant continuity; it is deserving to say as single continuity; the phenomenon of incessant continuity, therefore, is the factor for arising of single line. Similarly in this cycle of dependent-origination the phenomenon of incessant continuity of causal and resultant ***dhammas***, ignorance, formations etc., is the principle of factor of arising of single continuity called ***ekatta***. It shows the meaning in this way. ***(Mūlaṭī- 2-131)*** 

**6.1.A Further explanations** 

It will be explicit for those virtuous ***meditators*** who are unable to understand and discern clearly. 

The practicing person will see continuity of the following ***dhammas***, viz.,  

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE14

1) past corporeality-mentality which give rise to occur past causal ***dhammas***, (= past corporeality-mentality of that past period); 
1) corporeality-mentality which are occurring in the period from present ***paṭisandhi*** until performing ***vipassanā*** practice or until discerning principle of dependent-origination, (= it is inclusive in ***addhā paccuppanna*** ***dhamma***, present life ***dhamma***); 
1) for  virtuous  ***meditator***  who  can  finish  journey  of  rounds  of  rebirth  in  this  life, corporeality-mentality which are occurring in the period from discerning principle of  dependent-origination as beginning until final death of Arahant, (= it is inclusive in ***addhā paccuppanna*** ***dhamma***, present life ***dhamma***); 
1) unless  he  can  practice  to  become  Arahant  in  any  future  successive  lives,  those corporeality-mentality which will be occurring in those future lives again and again; 

**PAGE-216** 

In other words – the practicing ***meditator*** will see continuity of corporeality-mentality which have been occurred; which are occurring; which will be occurring within three periods called past, present, future, as single continuity. 

It will be presented further explanation to be understood clearly. If one righteous ***meditator***  discerns  both  the  mind-clear-element  which  was  occurring  during  cultivating wholesome actions in previous existence and the mind-clear-element which occurs at recent moment, he can see continuity of mind-clear-element continuously as single line. He has to scrutinize whether or not the life-continuum mind-clear-clement which was inclusive in the continuity of corporeality-mentality of wholesome deed of past life was his life-continuum mind-clear-element. If it was his own life-continuum mind-clear-element, he can understand easily, it really is. It is because life-continuum of past life and life-continuum of present life are  inclusive  in  single  continuity.  It  is  saying  in  order  to  be  clear  understood  the  life- continuum as priority. Remaining consciousness of cognitive processes also arise interval of life-continuums,  resulting  in  occurring  as  single  continuity.  Those  consciousness  of  life- continuum and cognitive processes arise alternately, one after another continuously, resulting in arising of single continuity. Similarly continuity of corporeality also arises through single continuity. Although they are arising through single continuity they never arise by means of ***nicca, sukha, atta*** but by means of ***anicca, dukkha, anatta***. 

**6.1.B Reflection of efficiency of past** 

When continuity of corporeality-mentality of past period is discerned by insight in this way some righteous ***meditators*** confess that past life and present life have got same temperament in most aspects. It is due to reflection of efficiency of past life and embedding of gas of hobby in the continuity of past corporeality-mentality. Practising both ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** can be said endeavouring to substitute with good purified gas in the place of bad pollutant gas through continuous trying to embed good purified gas within the continuity of corporeality-mentality. When one can eradicate bad pollutant gas completely and 100% good purified  gas becomes  saturated  in  his  continuum,  his practice  will  reach  into  the  climax really. 

**6.1.C Three-to-four persons** 

Sometimes  three-to-four  persons  who  were  performing  wholesome  deeds  usually appear  as  object  of  performing  wholesome  deeds  of  previous  life  in  the  practicing ***meditator***’s insight. At that time the righteous ***meditator*** must discern four great elements 
PAGE13

occurring-in continuum of each person one by one. Then corporeality-mentality must be kept in  mind  as  a  whole.  Life-continuum,  mind-clear-element  of  each  person  must  also  be scrutinized priority. At that time the righteous ***meditator*** usually understands easily whether it is his or her life-continuum or not. This is because the righteous ***meditator*** can see easily the fact past life-continuum was inclusive in his or her continuity of corporeality-mentality when he or she see single line of the past life-continuum mind-clear-element and present ones through experiential right view knowledge. 

If the life-continuum which is kept in mind by insight is not his or her life-continuum, he or she understands well it as improper one. This is because continuities of mentality are not  linking  each  other.  The  righteous  ***meditator***  can  see  discontinuous  phenomena  of continuity of past and present lives life-continuums separately. 

Continuity of corporeality-mentality, including life-continuum mind-clear-element, of past life and that of corporeality-mentality of present life arise successively. If the righteous ***meditator*** can discern that continuity of corporeality-mentality by penetrative insight, it can be said he or she understands ***ekatanaya***. It should be understood similarly on successive occurrence of continuity of corporeality-mentality of present life and future life as ***ekatanaya***. 

**PAGE-218** 

**6.1.D Annihilation view and eternity view (*ucchedadiṭṭhi-sassatadiṭṭhi*)** 

Because  this  right  view  knowledge  can  realize  penetratively  on  incessant  and successive continuity of corporeality-mentality through causal relationship of three periods, such as relationship between past causal ***dhammas*** and present resultant ***dhammas***, present causal ***dhammas*** and future resultant ***dhammas*** etc., the righteous ***meditator*** can abandon the wrong  annihilation  view,  which believes  that  “life exists between  cradle  and  coffin;  one annihilates after death, there is nothing beyond coffin”, can be abandoned. Unless one see principle of causal relationships as they really are, one can hold the wrong eternity view which believes that the “self” (***atta***) never cease but it is eternal. It is due to seeing that phenomenon through obsessing as permanent nature, happiness nature, “self” nature but not impermanent nature, suffering nature, non-self nature. Due to inability to realize nature of ***anicca, dukkha, anatta*** of causal corporeality-mentality and resultant corporeality-mentality with the help of penetrative ***vipassanā*** knowledge, continuity of corporeality-mentality is obsessed  as  single  phenomenon  through  states  of  permanence  and  self.  That  kind  of obsession is called eternity view (***sassata*** ***diṭṭhi***). 

***tadevidam viññāņam sandhāvati samsarati anaññam. (M-1-323)*** 

That single consciousness only goes from one existence to another; it is caught in a circle repeatedly over and over (= it exists in single existence again and again). Another consciousness never go one existence to another; it (another consciousness) is not caught in a circle repeatedly over and over (= it does not exist in single existence again and again). ***(M-1- 323)***  

This kind of wrong eternity view usually arises in the continuum of worldly person. 

Although variations and specific occurrence of ultimate nature of causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are present apparently the only linking occurrence of those causal and resultant ***dhammas*** can be said incessant continuity as cause and result in the aspect of showing this ***ekatanaya***. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE16

Because only linking occurrence of such cause and result is designated as incessant continuity  of  corporeality-mentality\_\_\_\_\_  the  action  called  ***kamma***  has  been  arisen, cultivated;  resultant  ***dhamma***  arises  apparently  in  only  that  continuity  of  corporeality- mentality in which that action has been arisen. It should, therefore, be recognized there is neither destruction of action which has been accomplished nor arriving of new action which has not been done. Due to obsessing on non-variation which can be said single occurrence of both  kinds  of  cause  and  result  through  lacking  in  investigation  on  variation  of  causal ***dhamma*** and resultant ***dhamma*** but making single continuous occurrence of cause and result, one usually obsesses eternity view in a way that “that single consciousness only goes from one existence to another; it is caught in a circle repeatedly over and over” etc. (***Mahāṭī-2- 347***) 

**PAGE-219** 

**6.2.A. *Nānattanaya* (way of alluding as varieties)** 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Abhi-A-2-188) (Mūlaṭī-2-132) (Anuṭī-2-140)*** 

If  one  can  see  penetratively  on  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***,  i.e.,  ignorance, formations, consciousness, mind-matter, bases, contact, feeling, craving, clinging, coming- into-existence, birth,  ageing-death  etc.,  which  are  occurring  as  a  single  continuity  in  the aspect  of  ***ekattanaya***,  (1)  through  breaking  down  compactness  of  continuity  called ***santatighana***, resulting in ability to see both each mind moment and each corporeal unit separately; and (2) through breaking down compactness of form called ***samūhaghana***, resulting in ability to see  specific  characters  called  ultimate  nature  of  corporeality  and  mentality,  which  are consisting in corporeal unit and mental unit respectively, or 

if one can keep in mind discriminately each specific character of the ultimate element occurring  in  various  corporeal  units,  mental  units  called  ignorance,  formations, consciousness,  mind-matter  etc.,  it  can  be  said  he  understands  ***nānattanaya***  (=  way  of alluding as varieties), due to knowing and seeing penetratively on arising of new ultimate elements successively. 

The  practicing  ***meditator***  has  to  discern  each  ultimate  element  with  all-out  effort through way of discerning called characteristic-function-manifestation-proximate cause. Both sides of causal and resultant ***dhammas*** are essential to be discerned thoroughly. 

When one knows and sees that way of alluding as varieties correctly, he can abandon wrong eternity view which can obsesses as “self is eternal”, due to penetrative knowing and seeing  on  arising  of  new  ultimate  elements  through  causal  relationship  with  the  help  of experiential right view knowledge. 

**PAGE-220** 

**6.2.B How annihilation view can arise**  

If one can not see correctly, he can obsess annihilation view in a way that “take delight in present self-identity, suffer in another self-identity in future life”, due to obsessing as separate continuities of groups of corporeal and mental ***dhammas*** which fall within single continuity.***(Abhi-A-2-188, Vs-2-220)*** 

Due to obsessing on separate continuity of corporeality-mentality which are lacking any link of causal relationship between each other, one believes that the specific kinds of 
PAGE15

arising one being annihilates when he passes away, another being, other than one who passes away, arises again”, resulting in grasping annihilation view. ***(Mūlaṭī-2-132)*** 

Even though lives are separated the continuity of corporeality-mentality, aggregates is unique continuously. For instance, the continuity of corporeality-mentality of the Supreme Buddha  from  the  life  of  hermit,  ***Sumedhā***  ***bodhisatta***  until  the  life  of  buddhahood,  was unique  continuously.  However  that  may be,  one  can  not believe  “unique  continuity” but separate continuities in a way that one passed away present life, another one arises again”, resulting in firm grasping annihilation view.  

Unless one realizes the arising of resultant ***dhamma*** through causal ***dhamma*** which is comformed with resultant ***dhamma*** (= if one comes to an end of other’s saying but not practicing he, himself), he usually views in a way that resultant ***dhammas*** are free from causal ***dhammas***; causal ***dhammas*** are also lacking resultant ***dhammas***, due to inability to see phenomenon of link of causes and results within unique continuity of corporeality-mentality, as there is no link of causes and results of different continuities of various beings. Then one usually believes firmly annihilation view through thinking here and there in various ways that “actually it is inappropriate to arise resultant ***dhammas*** through causal ***dhammas*** because there is no fixed nomination as causal ***dhamma*** at the cessation of previous ***dhammas*** which are neither causes nor results; similarly\_\_\_\_\_ it is inappropriate phenomena that the arising of unique  continuity  of  corporeality-mentality;  the  arising  of  resultant  ***dhamma***  which  is conformed with causal ***dhamma***; the arising of species, place, physique, size, appearance, strength etc., which are conformed with causal ***dhammas***”. (***Anuṭī***-***2-140***) 

**PAGE-221** 

**6.3.A. *Avyāpāranaya* (way of alluding as no endeavour) *Pāli Quotation*** ***(Abhi-A-2-188) (Mahāṭī-2-348)*** 

There  is  no  endeavour  in  the  side  of  causal  ***dhammas***  so  as  to  arise  resultant ***dhammas***; there is no endeavour in the side of resultant ***dhammas*** also in a way that “we (resultant ***dhammas***) will arise apparently, if causal ***dhammas*** arise”. 

The ignorance lacks endeavour called “I (the ignorance) have to produce formations”; the  formations  also  lack  endeavour  called  “we  (=  formations)  have  to  produce consciousness”,  and  so  forth.  Thus  the  nature  of  lacking  endeavour  in  those  ***dhammas***, ignorance, formations etc., is called ***avyaparanaya***. 

***Sammāpassanto\_\_\_\_\_*** The person who knows and sees in this way that\_\_\_\_ these ***dhammas***, ignorance, formations etc., 

1. ***nirīhā*** = are lacking endeavour so as to arise resultant ***dhammas***; 
1. ***nijjīva*** = are neither vital body, living body, nor self-identity so as to endeavour in that way; 
1. ***dhammamattā***  =  are  mere  natural  phenomena  (***dhammasabhāva***)  which  can  produce respective resultant ***dhammas***;  

is designated as the person who knows and sees correctly (***sammāpassanto***). 

If  practicing  ***meditator***  knows  and  sees  that  ***avyāpāranaya***  penetratively  by experiential  right  view  knowledge,  he  can  abandon  “self-belief  called  ***attadiṭṭhi***”,  which grasps the opinion that there is both ***jīvaatta*** (living self) which is created and ***paramaatta*** (sublime self) which is creator, due to penetrative knowing and seeing on absence nature of creator,  ***parama***  ***atta***,  which  can  be  said  the  doer  who  is  capable  of  making,  managing, creating. (***Abhi-A-2-188***) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE18

Even though those ***dhammas***, ignorance, formations etc., lack endeavour so as to arise resultant ***dhammas*** apparently those ***dhammas*** have got potentiality which can give rise to occur resultant ***dhammas***. 

***Pāli Quotation*** ***(Udāna-79)*** 

“If  this  causal  ***dhamma***  is  present  apparently,  this  resultant  ***dhamma***  is  present apparently; due to obvious occurrence of this causal ***dhamma***, this resultant ***dhamma*** occurs obviously. If this causal ***dhamma*** is not present, this resultant ***dhamma*** is not present; due to cessation of this causal ***dhamma***, this resultant ***dhamma*** ceases”. ***(Udāna-79)*** 

Thus the practicing ***meditator*** understands and he has to try to realize really. This is the nature of occurrence of causal ***dhamma*** through natural fixed law. 

**PAGE-222** 

If one can not know and see correctly that ***avyaparanaya***, he usually grasps ***akiriya*** ***diṭṭhi***, the wrong view called “even though one does it can not say he does”, due to inability to accept that principle, “even though causal ***dhammas*** have no endeavour so as to arise resultant ***dhammas*** those causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc., have got nature of occurrence of causality which is accomplished through natural fixed law.” (***Abhi***-***A-2-188***) 

**6.3.B Meaning of natural fixed law** 

Constant phenomenon in nature is called ***sabhāvaniyama*** (natural fixed law). As the nature of both upward direction of fire-element (***tejo***) together with structural constituents called corporealities produced by temperature within same corporeal unit and moving athwart by the air-element (***vāyo***) together with structural constituents called corporealities produced by temperature within same corporeal unit are fixed law-similarly\_\_\_\_\_ if causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc, are present apparently, resultant ***dhammas***, formations etc., arise apparently, if causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc., are absent, resultant ***dhammas***, formation etc., do not arise. In other word\_\_\_\_\_ if causal ***dhammas***, called ignorance-craving-clinging-formation-action, are present apparently, resultant ***dhammas*** called consciousness-mind-matter-bases-contact- feeling also arise apparently; if those causal ***dhammas*** are absent, resultant ***dhammas*** do not arise. Thus there is occurrence of such cause of result which is conformed with cause through accomplishing naturally. It means the occurrence of this cause is the natural phenomenon which is accomplished through fixed nature of ultimate ***dhamma***. (***Mahāṭī***-***2-348***) 

If one can not accept the principle of presence of efficiency of causal ***dhammas*** which is accomplished through natural fixed law so as to arise resultant ***dhammas***, formations etc., a kind of wrong view called ***akiriya*** ***diṭṭhi*** by which one believes that there is no relation between any kind of bodily action, verbal action, mental action and result, and action and consequence of action are rejected, can arise in him, due to absence of any doer, person, being in the aspect of ultimate reality. It means in this way. (***Mahāṭī***-***2-348***) 

4. ***Evamdhammatānaya* (way of alluding as fixed law) *Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-188, 189)*** 

**PAGE-223** 
PAGE17

As resultant ***dhammas***, curd etc., arise, due to milk etc., when resultant ***dhammas*** arise, due to causal ***dhammas***, only resultant ***dhammas***, formations etc., arise but not any other resultant ***dhammas***. In other words, if any kind of result arises through causal ***dhammas*** called  ignorance-craving-clinging-formation-action,  only  –only  resultant  ***dhammas***  called consciousness-mind-matter-bases-contact-feeling arise but not any other resultant ***dhammas***. This principle is called ***evamdhammatanaya***. 

The practicing ***meditator*** who knows and sees that ***evamdhammatānaya*** penetratively with the help of experiential right view knowledge can abandon both kinds of wrong views called ***ahetukadiṭṭhi*** which believes every resultant ***dhamma*** is lacking causal ***dhamma*** and ***akiriyadiṭṭhi*** which believes there is no causal ***dhamma*** which can produce result, due to penetrative knowing and seeing on the phenomenon of arising of resultant ***dhamma*** which is conformed with causal ***dhamma***. (***Abhi***-***A-2-188, 189***) Both of these opinions reject both kinds of causal and resultant ***dhammas***. 

If one can not accept the arising of resultant ***dhamma*** which is conformed with cause resulting from without knowing and seeing on that ***evamdhanmaāanaya***, he can grasp the opinion  that  due  to  any  random  cause,  any  random  result  can  arise,  such  as,  oil  can be produced by sand, milk can be produced by sugar-cane. Therefore the causeless view called ***ahetukadiṭṭhi*** by which a kind of belief that “no result can arise through any cause”, can be grasped firmly. 

**6.4.A. *niyatavāda* (Fixed wrong view)** 

When one questions the person with that causeless view that if there is no cause in that way, how recent seeing conditioned things called living, non-living things arise?”, he usually replies that those are always fixedly determined, such as “human or deva or various animals must be occurred at fixed timed (***niyata***)”. That opinion is called ***niyatavāda***. 

***yasamā  niyativādī  anurūpā  hetuto  phaluppattim  na  icchati,  sabhāva  siddhimeva  ca dhammapavattim icchati. (Anuṭī-2-140)*** 

That person with fixed wrong view called ***niyatavādī*** does not desire the arising of resultant ***dhamma*** which is conformed with causal ***dhamma*** through appropriate cause but arising of ***dhammas*** which are accomplished through fixed determination naturally. (***Mūlaṭī***- ***2-132, Anuṭī-2-140, 141***) (This opinion is similar to opinion of some scientists who are called atheist  and  they  do  not  accept  “action-consequence  of  action  view”,  they  never  practice appropriate acceptable meditation subjects any more.) 

The person who views this ***evamdhammatānaya*** wrongly, therefore, usually grasps both ***ahetuka*** ***diṭṭhi*** (causeless view) and ***niyatavāda*** (fixed wrong view), due to rejecting the arising of resultant ***dhamma*** which is conformed with causal ***dhamma*** but grasping insuitable view  called  any  random  resultant  ***dhamma***  arises  through  any  random  causal  ***dhamma***. (***Abhi***-***A-2-189***) 

**PAGE-224** 

**6.4.B How *ahetukadiṭṭhi* and *akiriya* *diṭṭhi* can be abandoned** 

Curd can be made from milk but not from water. Sesame oil can be produced from sesame  seeds  but  not  from  sand.  Similarly\_\_\_\_\_  only  appropriate  resultant  ***dhammas***, formations etc., can arise due to causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc. In this way the practicing person can abandon ***ahetukadiṭṭhi***, due to discerning and seeing on the fact “all kinds of resultant ***dhammas*** ought not to arise, due to all kinds of causal ***dhammas***,” by experiential 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE20

knowledge.  Then  he  can  abandon  ***akiriyadiṭṭhi***,  due  to  ability  to  realize  the  arising  of resultant ***dhammas***, formations etc., which are conformed with causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc. (***Mahāṭī-2-348***) 

**6.4.C *Ahetuka* *diṭṭhi* and *niyatavāda*** 

The person who does not know and see ***evamdhammatānaya*** through experiential knowledge usually accepts the opinion that any kind of random result can not arise, due to any kind of random cause but he rejects the arising of resultant ***dhamma*** which is conformed with causal ***dhamma***. Due to presence of that opinion, it is possible to produce oil from sand; curd  from  sugar-cane.  Therefore  the  wrong  view  called ***ahetukadiṭṭhi***  which believes  no resultant ***dhamma*** can arise, due to any cause, is grasped firmly. (***Mahāṭī-2-348)*** 

When one questions the person with that causeless view that if there is no cause in that way, how recent seeing conditioned things called living, non-living things arise?”, he usually replies that those are always fixedly determined, such as “human or deva or various animals must be occurred at fixed timed (***niyata***)”. 

Sesame oil is produced from sesame seeds; milk is secreted from cow; bodies of animals develop from sperm; “these kinds of phenomena are fixed nature”, grasped by that person. That kind of person with ***niyatavāda*** does not desire appropriate arising of result which is conformed  with  cause  but  arising  of  ***dhammas***  which  are  accomplished  through  fixed determination naturally. (See detailed account in ***makkhalivāda, Sāmañña Sutta***.) (***Mahāṭī***- ***2-348, Anuṭī-2-140, 141)*** 

With regarding to above reasoning every practicing ***meditator*** has to endeavour in order to realize principle of dependent-origination through experiential right view knowledge for the purpose of ability to remove completely various wrong views called eternity view, annihilation view, causeless view, ***akiriya*** ***diṭṭhi***, ***natthika*** ***diṭṭhi***, ***niyatavāda*** etc. 

**PAGE-225** 

Every righteous ***meditator*** should like to keep firmly in mind the fact “penetrative knowing and seeing on principles of dependent-origination through experiential right view knowledge is the most powerful and purified weapon so as to eradicate and reject various wrong views.” 

**PAGE-226** 

5. **Various existences on the stage called rounds of rebirth** 

In the way of practice found in ***Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta*** the Exalted One instructed to discern over and over again on the processes of both how five clinging aggregates called resultant ***kāya-vedanā-citta***-***dhamma*** arise, due to apparent arising of causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance, craving, clinging, formations, action etc; pure phenomenon of arising of those resultant five clinging aggregates; and  

How  five  clinging  aggregates  called  resultant  ***kāya-vedanā-citta***-***dhamma***  cease absolutely without reappearing in future, due to absolute cessation of causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance,  craving,  clinging,  formations,  action  without  reappearing  in  future;  pure phenomenon of momentary dissolution of those five clinging aggregates, 
PAGE19

In other words, the Exalted One instructed to discern the nature of cause of arising and nature of arising; the nature of cause of cessation and nature of cessation over and over again. 

In  this  section  it  will  be  explicit  on  the  facts  relating  to  the  usages  called ***anulomapaṭicca samuppāda, paṭilomapaṭṭicca samuppāda*** as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

In  ***Bodhikathā,  Mahā  Vagga,  Pāli***  Text  of  ***Vinaya***,  it  is  preached  that  “***paṭicca samuppādam anulomapaṭilomam manasākāsi*** = principle of dependent-origination is taken into heart through both in order and reverse order. With regarding to the term, ***manasākāsi*** (= taken into heart), it is showing how ***vipassanā*** practice was taken into heart, the section of way of taking into heart on the phenomenon that ***avijjāpaccayā sańkhārā, sańkhārapaccayā viññāņam***”  etc.,  due  to  arising  of  causal  ***dhammas***,  resultant  ***dhammas***  arise,  is  called principle of dependent-origination is taken into heart in order and that principle is called ***anulomapaṭiccasamuppāda***. 

Furthermore the section of way of taking into heart how resultant ***dhammas*** cease, due to absolute cessation of causal ***dhammas*** was also preached in a way that “***avijjāyatveva asesavirāganirodhā  sańkhāranirodho***”  etc.  That  section  of  dependent-origination  which shows how formations ceases absolutely, due to absolute cessation of ignorance in that way is called ***paṭilomapaṭicca samuppāda*** and way of taking into heart is also called principle of dependent-origination is taken into heart in reverse order. 

Again, the way of preaching on dependent-origination in reverse order as mentioned previously with example of creeper collector, by which factors of dependent-origination, such as ageing-death, the beginning until ignorance, were preached in reverse order, is also called ***paṭilomapaṭiccasamuppāda***. 

Way of taking into heart in reverse order, such as ageing-death arise, due to birth; birth arises, due to ***kamma*** coming-into-existence, etc., is also called reverse way of taking into heart principle of dependent-origination. 

**PAGE-227** 

***Pāli Quotation (Dī-A-2-75)*** 

One day the most Venerable ***Ānanda Thero*** entered into the Fruition-Absorption of Upstream-enterer  at  day  time  meditation  retreat.  After  emerging  from  the  Fruition- Absorption  which  had  been  entered  through  the  period  determined  by  ***Mahā  Thero***,  he realized principle of dependent-origination called ***paccayakāra***. 

The most Venerable ***Ānanda*** discerned (12) factors of dependent-origination three times through alternate generalizing on three general characters of factors…. 

1) ignorance as beginning until the end, ageing-death, such as ***avijjāpaccayā sańkhārā*** etc., 
1) the end, ageing-death as beginning until ignorance as end, 
1) from two kinds of extremities, ignorance and ageing-death until the middle (It means from the beginning until the middle; from the end until the middle), 
1) from  the  middle  until  two  kinds  of  extremities  (it  means  from  the  middle  until beginning; from the middle until the end.) 

When he discerned in this way the principle of dependent-origination appears in the insight of Venerable ***Ānanda*** very clearly. ***(Dī-A-2-75)*** 

The reason why these four kinds of nature of factors of dependent-origination i.e., 

1) from the beginning until the end, 
1) from the end until the beginning, 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE22

3) from the beginning until the middle, from the end until the middle, 
3) from the middle until the beginning, from the middle until the end, 

appear apparently and clearly in the Venerable ***Ānanda***’s insight is explained in commentary as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

Due to completion with these factors, i.e., 

1. ***pubbūpanissayasampatti***  =  completion  with  the  efficiency  of  relation  of determinative dependence called perfections which had been performed to be fulfiled in previous existences occurring in hundred thousands aeons 
1. ***titthavāsa*** = approaching to noble teachers, the Supreme Buddha together with the most Venerable ***Sāriputta***, who were very respectable righteous persons, who were similar to harbour that can lead to ***nibbāna*** in the noble admonishment,  
1. ***sotāpanna*** = occurrence of Upstream-enterer, 
1. ***bahussutabhāva*** = presence of general knowledge, 

the principle of dependent-origination appears clearly in the insight of Venerable ***Ānanda*** Thero. (***Dī-2-78***) 

**PAGE-228** 

Among  those  factors  one  noticeable  fact  for  righteous  ***meditator***  is  the  third, occurrence of the Up stream-enterer. 

***sotāpannānanca nāma paccayākāro uttānakova hutvā upaṭṭhāti.*** 

***(Dī-A-2-83)*** 

- If  one  is  the  Upstream-enterer  really,  the  principle  of  dependent-origination  called ***paccayakara*** which is very profound and difficult will appear apparently in the insight of himself. 

A righteous ***meditator*** might think himself as an Upstream-enterer. At that time he should like to question himself that whether I can know and see penetratively on principle of dependent-origination which is occurring in three periods, past, future, present by experiential right view knowledge or not. If he can answer himself as “no”, he can determine surely that “I’m not real Upstream-enterer  meant by the  Exalted One”. This is because principle of dependent-origination appears well in the insight of the Noble One called Upstream-enterer meant by the Exalted One. 

6. **The nature of cessation without reappearing (*anuppādanirodha*)** 

As mentioned above, because the Exalted One instructed in ***Mahā satipaṭṭhāna Sutta*** that  not  only  ***anulomapaṭicca  samuppāda***  but ***paṭiloma  paṭiccasamuppāda***  must  also  be discerned, way of cessation must be discerned. There is a question when ignorance-craving- clinging-formation-action  cease  absolutely  without  reappearing?  In  the  sub-commentary called ***Mahāṭīkā*** it is explained as follows:-- 

***Pāli Quotation* (*Mahāṭī*-2-421)** 

While the practicing ***meditator*** develops ***vipassanā*** practice through successive stages of ***vipassanā*** insight he reaches into the Path-Knowledge of Arahant through sequence of the Path and Fruit-Knowledge depending on acquired perfections accordingly. At that time the Path-Knowledge of Arahant eradicates ignorance-craving-clinging absolutely. Due to lack of association of defilements called ignorance-craving-clinging, wholesome and unwholesome 
PAGE21

actions are lacking efficiency to produce new coming-into-existence anymore, resulting in absolute deterioration. 

Due to absolute cessation of ignorance without reappearing in future through the Path- Knowledge of Arahant, future five clinging aggregates cease absolutely without reappearing again after final death of Arahant called ***parinibbānacuti***. It is because if causal ***dhammas*** called ignorance-craving-clinging-formations-action are absent, resultant-five aggregates can not arise consequently. (***Mahāṭī***-2***-421***) 

**PAGE-229** 

7. **Bear in mind carefully** 

The righteous ***meditator*** should like to bear in mind above explanations carefully. Above way of discerning on absolute cessation of five aggregates is explained in detailed account of (50) ways of discerning the Knowledge of Arising and passing Away in ***Visuddhi Magga*** with referring to ***Paṭisanbhidā Magga*** **pp.54**. 

Now unless the righteous ***meditator*** reaches into the Path-Knowledge of Arahant that time is inclusive in future period in the aspect of three kinds of present called momentary present  (***khaņapaccuppanna***)  continuity  present  (***santati  paccuppanna***),  lifetime  present (***addhāpaccuppanna***).  Way  of  absolute  cessation  without  reappearing  in  future  must  be discerned during performing ***vipassanā*** practice as worldly person who is still endeavouring so as to attain ***vipassanā*** knowledge called Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition, Knowledge of Comprehension, Knowledge of Arising and Passing Away etc. Therefore the righteous ***meditator*** has to bear in mind respectfully the fact those instructions not to discern past and future are contrary to the ***Pāli*** Texts, commentaries, sub-commentaries. 

It  will  be  presented  examples  of  a  righteous  ***meditator***  who  had  got  various experiences in the stage of rounds of rebirth so as to attain clear understanding on way of keeping in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** occurring in three periods called past, future, present. 

1. First previous life (life of lady)\_\_\_\_\_ 

After  keeping  in  mind  corporeality-mentality  until  ***paṭisandhi***  that  practicing ***meditator***  scrutinized  causal  ***dhammas***  which  gave  rise  to  occur  ***paṭisandhi***  mind-matter again and then she found the appearance of object of action which was offering flowers on the  flat  ground  around  a  pagoda  at  moribund  period  of  a  lady  life.  Those  wholesome volitional formation groups consisted of (34) mental ***dhammas*** which were joyful wholesome formations group with three roots. Those were occurring within mind-door-cognitive process. When  she  scrutinized  ignorance-craving-clinging  continuously,  only  continuity  of  mind wishing attainment of ***nibbāna*** was found. Even though she wished to attain ***nibbāna***, when she scrutinized carefully again, however, inclination towards womanhood who was able to attain ***nibbāna*** was found. 

**PAGE-230** 

As she had inclination towards the woman’s life which can attain ***nibbāna*** during offering flowers, when that object of action appeared in the mind-door at moribund period she found the continuity of mind that inclining towards the woman’s life who can attain ***nibbāna***. Those wrong knowing as woman who can attain ***nibbāna***, craving on that woman’s life,  strong  attachment  on  that  woman’s  life  are  ignorance-craving-clinging  respectively. Those  mental  ***dhammas***  occurred  as  continuity  of  mind-door  cognitive  processes.  Each 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE24

impulsion consisted of (20) mental ***dhamma*** of greed-wrong view group. By scrutinizing efficiency of action of wholesome volitional formation groups (34) during offering flowers which  were  surrounded  by  those  ignorance-craving-clinging  she  found  that  consequence aggregates, ***paṭisandhi*** five aggregates, etc., were produced by that wholesome action. 

Other  actions  done  by  herself—Other  kinds  of  actions  scrutinized  and  found  by herself were actions through practices. She could discern both white ***kasiņa*** and four great elements.  Corporeal  units  could  be  seen  but  not  analyze  to  the  ultimate  nature.  Due  to presence of efficiency of these actions, she became a sharp wisdom woman in the practices of both ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā***. 

2. **Second previous life (female dryad life)** 

In that life she had got spontaneous born ***paṭisandhi***. During ***paṭisandhi*** there were (7) kinds  of  corporeal  units  consisting  of  (70)  kinds  of  corporealities;  ***paṭisandhi***  mental ***dhammas*** consisted of (34) mental ***dhammas***. 

She had got opportunity to offer alms-food to three ***bhikkhus*** who came into the forest  where  she  lived.  At  that  time  she  wished  to  become  human  lady  life.  Ignorance- craving-clinging were (20) kinds of mental ***dhammas***. Formations-action were (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas***. By the time quite close to death that object of action appeared in the mind- door, resulting in acquiring the first previous life, a lady (= consequence five aggregates). 

\4.  Third previous life ( old woman life) 

When she scrutinized continuously causal ***dhammas*** cultivated in third previous life again she found woman life, too. She was poor and country folk. As tradition of village she always offered alms-food to the monastery, she observed the eight Buddhist precepts, and morality. She  lived  solitarily  in  her  house  and  she  offered  light  of  open  oil  lamp  every  day.  At moribund period an object of emblem of destination, edifice on the tree, appeared through efficiency of action of offering light of open oil lamp. During making merits she did not wish to become female dryad life but inclination towards that life was present sometimes. 

**PAGE-231** 

She had got second previous life female dryad life through efficiency of action of offering light of open old lamp in that third previous life. However she seemed to be not long life-span in female dryad life. 

[ignorance-craving-clinging  consisted  of  (20)  mental  ***dhammas***;  formation-action  group consisted of (34) mental ***dhammas***.] 

4. **Fourth previous life (*bhikkhu’s* life)\_\_\_\_\_** 

Then she continued to scrutinize causal ***dhammas*** cultivated in the fourth previous life and found those actions which were cultivated in ***bhikkhu’s*** life. In novice life he learned scriptures  and  recited  scriptures.  Then  he  grown  up  to  monkhood.  When  that  ***bhikkhu*** became old in age he developed absorption of ***kasiņa***-object under tree, foot of bamboo, and around  lake.  He  had  got  upto  the  fourth  absorption  but  could  not  change  to  ***vipassanā*** practice. He could not develop stability of absorptions and fallen back frequently. He stayed in forest monastery and he always offered alms-food the statue of Buddha every day. 

At moribund period due to oppression of disease he was forgetfulness, resulting in inclination towards his  mother.  Inclination towards  mother  gave rise to occur inclination towards woman’s life at moribund period. Even though inclination towards woman’s life did not  appear  during  cultivating  action  of  offering  alms-food,  heartfelt  desire  to  become 
PAGE23

woman’s life deposited as underlying tendency of lust in his continuum. At the moribund period the object of emblem of action, offering alms-food, appeared in the mind door. Due to presence of those formation-action, offering alms-food to the statue of the Buddha, he had got woman’s  life  as  third  previous  life.  [ignorance-craving-clinging  consisted  of  (20)  mental ***dhammas***; formation-action group consisted of (34) mental ***dhammas***.] 

Continuity of mind occurring at moribund period are, indeed, very weak continuity like dream. It is essential to prepare for attainment of efficiency to control one’s mind so as to fix any object as he likes. Unless reliable preparation is available, the continuity of mind usually adheres to random objects as a person takes any float, such as, even dead body, when boat or ship capsizes in the sea. At moribund period continuity of very weak minds usually adheres random objects without selecting good or bad as continuity of minds catches various objects from here to there during dreaming.  In accordance with the Buddha’s preaching, ***cittena nīyate loko***, the mind leads to various coming-into-existences. Even though purified mind is very cherishable the mind smeared with impurities of defilement is very loathsome and fearful. Everybody has to keep in mind awareness. 

**PAGE-232** 

5. **Fifth previous life (old man’s life)\_\_\_\_\_** 

Then she continued to scrutinize causal ***dhammas*** cultivated in the fifth previous life and found groups of wholesome volitional formations which were performed in an old man’s life through worshipping a pagoda. That old man had got human existence in a place where the  Exalted  One’s  admonishment  was  nearly  extinct.  That  old  man  wished  to  become  a ***bhikkhu***  who  can  propagate  the  Buddha’s  teaching  in  the  region  where  the  Buddha’s teaching was shinning. At the moribund period the object of action worshipping the pagoda appeared in the mind door and then he had got the ***bhikkhu’s*** life in the fourth previous life through that action. [ignorance-craving-clinging  consisted  of  (20)  mental  ***dhammas***;  formation- action group consisted of (34) mental ***dhammas***.]

6. **Sixth previous life (woman’s life) \_\_\_\_\_** 

She was a lay woman devotee who had got strong belief of the buddhism in that life. She made a living through growing cotton and weaving fabrics. When her husband passed away she had got great grief and despair, resulting in arising desire to deliverance to suffering of rounds of rebirth. She did not want to become woman’s life with lamentation in that way. Therefore she made a wholesome deed in front of a Buddha’s statue and wished to attain ***nibbāna***. The object of emblem of action, worshipping to the Buddha’s statue, appeared in the mind-door at moribund period. She had inclination towards man’s life. She had got man’s life in the fifth previous life, due to that action. 

**Fire of lamentation \_\_\_\_\_** That practising ***meditator*** usually becomes sorrowful whenever she discerns continuity of mind during occurring lamentation, due to passing away of her husband of sixth previous woman’s life. As joyful feeling arise in one’s continuum, due to benefitting of efficiency of relation of object so as to arise pleasurable interest during meeting with smiling friend; As sorrowful feeling arises in one’s continuum, due to benefiting of efficiency of relation of object so as to arise disagreeable feeling during seeing sorrowful friend who is very found of oneself, similarly sorrowful continuity of mind predominated with disagreeable feeling usually arises in her continuum, due to benefiting of efficiency of 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE26

relation  of  object  whenever  sorrowful  continuity  of  mind  of  the  sixth  previous  life  is discerned again. 

This  practising  ***meditator***  has  got  so  many  experiences  of  attainment  of  different previous existences, human, heavenly being, animal man, woman etc. She had got human’s existence of both under and out of the Supreme Buddha’s admonishment. 

In eighth previous life, she was a queen. She offered alms-food to ***bhikkhus*** and then she developed recollection on the noble qualities of the Supreme Buddha. However those wholesome actions had no opportunity to produce results at moribund period. 

**PAGE-233** 

That queen had great affection of the king. She was very sorry before die, due to knowing that the king never came near her but wasting time at another persons attending on royalty.  Her  continuity  of  mind  occurring  at  moribund  period  was  predominate  with lamentation, i.e., disagreeable feeling, resulting in passing away with the object of emblem of destination of animal existence. In the seventh previous life, therefore, she had got female deer life. It is warning point for those persons who have strong attachment on husband or wife, who have got lamentation relating to their husband or wife, who feel deeply hurt on their partners of family life each other. 

Then  the  life  was  terminated  by  a  hunter  in  that  animal  life.  However,  due  to appearance of object of emblem of action, offering alms-food to ***bhikkhus***, which had been done in eighth previous life, a queen’s life, at moribund period of that deer’s life, the sixth life of sorrowful woman who had got great lamentation, due to death of husband, became consequently again. 

She  found  that  at  gas  of  heartfelt  adorement  on  husband  and  gas  of  lamentation depending on husband always follows with her previous lives continuously. 

Furthermore\_\_\_\_\_ when she discerned 20th previous life, she found as a gentleman’s life. In that gentleman’s life, due to presence of unwholesome misdeed, stealing through 

insufficient wages to a servitor of himself, bull’s life was accepted as 19th previous life. 

In that bull’s life, that bull had got wholesome deeds through frequent listening to noble qualities of the Buddha, recited by it’s owner. Due to wholesome action of listening ***dhamma***, 18th previous life was accepted as man. It was similar to a heavenly being called ***maņduka devaputta***, who became heavenly being from a frog life at the Buddha’s time. 

In  18th  previous  man’s  life,  he  gave  sanctuary  for  bovines.  Then  he  wished  to emancipate from suffering of rounds of rebirth by pouring water out from kettle. Due to that 

wholesome deed, 17th previous life was accepted as hermit life. In the hermit’s life, he had got purified morality and he could develop and cultivate ***samatha*** practices. 

Then 21st previous life was, however, a dancer lady. In dancer lady life she disgusted to woman’s life because surrounding men had got lust and made misconduct on her body. She worshipped and wished in front of the Buddha’s statue so as to attain man’s life. Due to 

that wholesome action, 20th previous life had got man’s life. 

The  journey  of  past  rounds  of  rebirth  is  too  long,  resulting  in  inability  to  know through following insight continuously. Due to covering of the hindrance of ignorance, due to tying up with rope of fetter called craving, the previous extremity of rounds of rebirth of beings, who always run various existences from this existence to that existence over and over, who  always  reach  into  the  same  life  repeatedly  again  and  again,  can  not  be  known  by disciple’s insight. 

**PAGE-234** 
PAGE25

Disciples  are  unable  to  discern  all  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  occurring throughout  every  life  in  very  long  infinite  rounds  of  rebirth.  However  a  few  previous existences must be discerned in order to attain clear understanding the fact there were only causal and resultant ***dhammas*** in previous lives, too. Especially every ***meditator*** should like to  discern  until  the  previous  life  in  which  fertile  seed  of  knowledge  and  fertile  seed  of practice were cultivated.  

When  this  practicing  ***meditator***,  mentioned  above,  scrutinized  those  seeds  of knowledge and practice it includes wholesome seeds of charity, morality, ***samatha*** practice completely in the aspect of seed of practice. In the aspect of seed of knowledge, however, she had experienced to discern four great elements only. 

8. **Opinion of the Most Venerable Ledi Sayadaw** 
1. For a disciple\_\_\_\_ if he was experienced to keep in mind corporeality-mentality upto the field of ultimate nature, it was the third class seed of knowledge; 
1. If he had got the Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition due to ability to discern and keep in mind causal and resultant ***dhammas*** occurring in three periods, past, future, present, it was the second class seed of knowledge; 
1. If he had experienced to attain ***vipassanā*** knowledge through generalizing as three characters on those corporeality-mentality-causes-results, it was the first class seed of knowledge, 
1. If he had experienced to discern four great elements only, it might be sufficient seed of knowledge for attainment of Path, Fruit and ***nibbāna*** in the aspect of disciple’s knowledge, decided by the Most Venerable Ledi Sayadaw. (See detailed account in ***Bodhipakkhiyadīpanī***.) 

Seed of practice is similar to hands and foot, while seed of knowledge, to eye. As hand  and  foot  carry  so  as  to  reach  desired  destination,  as  the  hands  can  perform accomplishment of desired function, the seed of practice carry the person so as to meet noble virtuous persons, the Supreme Buddha etc., who will teach ***dhammas*** which are causes to lead to ***nibbāna***. As the eye can see various visible objects, 

The  seed  of  knowledge  gives  rise  to  occur  efficiency  to  accept  Noble  ***Dhamma***  when opportunity to listen ***dhammas*** relating to Four Noble Truths is available. It benefits in order to  know  and  see  penetratively  on  Four  Noble  Truths.  Therefore  both  kinds  of  seeds  of practice and knowledge play essential role in attainment of ***nibbāna*** for every disciple. 

**PAGE-235** 

The Most Venerable Ledi Sayadaw decided that an itinerant heretic called Saccaka could not attain ***nibbāna***, due to lack of seed of knowledge, while a married couple, the son of wealthy person called ***Mahādhana*** could not attain ***nibbāna*** in that life, due to lack of seed of practice. Unless one can realize the Noble Path and Fruit-Knowledge, ***nibbāna*** in this very life, those wholesome deeds, charity, morality, ***samatha*** and ***vipassanā*** practices, which are performed with the aim of attainment of ***nibbāna*** will be existing as fertile seeds of practice and knowledge in the continuum of himself really. 

**6.9.A Causes and results in future** 

The practicing ***meditator*** mentioned above believes that ***bhikkhu’s*** life is noble life. Whenever  offering  alms-food  for  ***sanghā***  she  wishes  to  become  ***bhikkhu’s***  life.  When 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE28

corporeality-mentality  are  kept  in  mind by  sending the  knowledge  towards  future  as  the beginning, corporeality-mentality which are occurring during keeping in mind causal and mental  ***dhammas***  object  of  action,  i.e.,  offering  alms-food,  appears  in  the  mind-door  at moribund  period  of  present  life.  In  accordance  with  the  explanation  found  in ***Abhidhammattha  Sangaha,***  i.e.,  ***“tameva  vā  pana  janakabhūtam  kammam abhinavakaraņavasena dvārapattam hoti”***, that definite action (***janakakamma***) which will produce ***paṭisandhi*** consequence appears in the mind door at moribund period by means of new re-performing again. 

1. The wrong knowing as ***bhikkhu*** is ignorance (=20). 
1. The heartfelt desire to ***bhikkhu’s*** life is craving (=20). 
1. The strong attachment to ***bhikkhu’s*** life is clinging (=20). 
1. Wholesome volitions group of offering alms-food are formations (=34). 
1. The efficiency of action of those wholesome volitions group is action. 

Five kinds of causal ***dhammas*** are fulfiled. That righteous ***meditator*** can discern the phenomenon of arising of consequence five aggregates of ***bhikkhu’s*** life in future due to those causal ***dhammas***. 

**6.9.B. Shall the future life become surely?** 

Most  righteous persons usually question that shall the future life become surely. 

1. There are many Noble Ones who will enter into ***nibbāna*** through taking final death in the  Highest  Realm  of  Pure  Abodes  called  ***akaniṭṭha***  after  go  down  and  upward existing in human and heavenly existence alternatively as king ***Sakka*** who is a Noble One called Upstream-enterer. In ***Pāli*** Text of ***Yamaka*** it is preached that there are two kinds of persons with final existence, i.e., real and false. 
1. There were some false persons with final existence, who pass away without attaining the  Noble  Path-Knowledge  of  Arahant,  even  though  they  have  got  seeds  of perfections  with  ability  to  become  Arahant,  as  a  son  of  wealthy  person  called ***Mahādhana***. 
1. There were some false persons with final existence, who pass away without attaining the Fruit-Knowledge of Upstream-enterer, as the King ***Ajātasattu***, though he had got fertile  seed  of perfection  with  ability  to  attain  the  Fruit-Knowledge  of  Upstream- enterer after listening ***Sāmaññaphala Sutta***, he did not attain the Fruit-Knowledge of Upstream-enterer, due to presence of unwholesome action that murdered his father. 

**PAGE-236** 

4. There were Noble Ones who will enter into ***nibbāna*** through taking final death in the Highest Realm of Pure Abode called ***akaniṭṭha*** after attaining the Fruit-Knowledge of Non-returnee in human world, as a potter called ***Ghaṭikāra***. 

Future existence will be present for these kinds of righteous persons. For real persons with final existence, as the Most Venerable ***Sāriputta***, and the Most Venerable ***Moggallāna***, there were no future five aggregates called future existence. The righteous ***meditator*** should like to discern which kind of person he might be in this very life. 

**6.9.C Why future is discerned?** 
PAGE27

Some persons usually ask this question. As mentioned above because the Exalted One, himself, instructed to discern how resultant five aggregates cease absolutely without reappearance in future, due to absolute cessation of causal ***dhammas*** without reappearance in future, that way of discerning must be discerned by experiential right view knowledge. 

If  any  righteous  ***meditator***  is  inclusive  in  the  list  of  the  false  persons  with  final existence, as the son of wealthy person called ***Mahādhana***, he has to practice by generalizing three  characters  on  those  future  five  aggregates,  causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  so  as  to remove  obsession  of  craving,  obsession  of  conceit,  obsession  of  wrong  view  on  future aggregates.  He  might  be  able  to  remove  those  obsessions  through  discerning  future aggregates in that way. 

If  one  can  break  down  absolutely  obsession  of  craving,  obsession  of  conceit, obsession of wrong view through performing ***vipassanā*** practice on corporeal ***dhammas***, mental ***dhammas***, causal ***dhammas***, resultant ***dhammas*** which are existing in three periods called past, future, present, and two continuums called internal, external, he will enter into the eternal peace in recent life in accordance with the explanation, ***upasanto carissati***. This is also the second reason. Due to presence of these two reasons, it is essential to discern future period. 

**6.9.D Can the future be changed?** 

The  future  life  can  be  changed  for  false  persons  with  final  existence  as  King ***Ajātasattu***. If king ***Ajātasattu*** became real Upstream-enterer, his future life might be changed into other kind. However he had got woeful hell existence, due to fixed heavy action called ***ānantariya kamma***, killing on father King ***Bimbisāra***, but not attaining Fruit-Knowledge of Upstream-enterer. Future life was altered towards woeful destination. 

Similarly\_\_\_ future life might be altered, if the righteous ***meditator*** includes in the list of false persons with final existence. As mentioned in above example unless one can develop Sublime action (***mahaggata kamma***), simple sensual wholesome actions, such as action of charity, offering alms food, are available to produce its result. 

**PAGE-237** 

If the righteous ***meditator*** can change to ***vipassanā*** practice basing on any kind of absorption, and then he can develop those sublime actions (= heavy actions) as superior kind, those heavy actions have opportunity to produce its result, in accordance with explanations, ***vipassanāya  hi  bahūpakāra  samāpatti  (M-A-1-387)***  =  various  absorptions  are  great benefittable  for  ***vipassanā***  knowledge;  and  “***vipassanā  pana  thāmajātā  samāpattimpi rakkhati  (M-A-1-388)***  =  powerful  ***vipassanā***  knowledge  also  protects  the  stability  of absorption.  The  righteous  ***meditator***  has  to  discern  his  future  period  by  making  various thinking with craving, wrong view, called ***kappanā*** after developing various actions. 

Those righteous persons who attain (8) kinds of absorption called ***jhānasamāpatti*** (if those  absorptions  do  not  fall  back  until  death)  can  choice  the  most  favourable  realm  of brahma  as  they  like.  This  kind  of  understanding  is  available  only  under  the  Noble Admonishment of the Buddha. Due to lack of this kind of understanding, the hermit called ***Kāļadevila***  believed  that  only  the  Supreme  most  absorption,  neither-perception-nor-non- perception can give rise to occur its consequence and heartfelt desire to become a *brahma* in that plane, resulting in taking ***paṭisandhi*** in that plane and missing to the Supreme Buddha. If he had got the knowledge that the most favourable realm can be chosen as he likes, he could get opportunity to become in any kind of fine-material sphere, as ***Sahampati brahma***. Then he could meet with the Supreme Buddha. 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE30

Similarly\_\_\_\_ the righteous ***meditator*** can choice any favorable realm of fine-material *brahma*, excluding Pure Abodes, if Sublime actions can be developed as superior kind. It is possible to develop those absorptions which are causes to reach that realm. At that time sensual wholesome actions which are great opportunate to produce results will fall back and that Sublime action will be better chance to give rise to produce its consequence. 

Therefore it should be recognized the fact future life can be changed for false persons with final existence but no change for the king ***Sakka*** who has got heartfelt desire to rounds of rebirth called ***vaṭṭābhirata***. In this case, one should not misunderstand on the fact only Sublime actions which are developed as superior kinds can give rise to occur results but those sublime actions which are developed as middle and inferior kinds can not give rise to occur results. It should be recognized the former kind is shown as example because former kinds are more powerful than the latter kinds of actions. 

**PAGE-238** 

10. **Instruction found in *Visuddhi Magga* *Pali Quotation (Vs-2-234, 235) (Mahāṭī-2-273)*** 

Due to ability to discerning on arising of present life through causal ***dhammas*** in this way, that practicing ***bhikkhu*** discerns over and over in such way that as these mind-matter arise in present life, due to causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc., similarly\_\_\_ these mind matter arose in past period, due to causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc., which had been cultivated in various past periods, second previous life etc., it will arise in future period too, due to causal ***dhammas***, ignorance etc. ***(Vs-2-234, 235)*** 

**6.10.A Keep in mind carefully** 

These four kinds of objects, viz,  

1. object of impulsions adjacent to death of previous life, 
1. object of ***paṭisandhi***-consciousness of present life, 
1. object of life-continuum mind clear-element of present life, 
1. object of death-consciousness which will appear in the termination of present life, 

must be same as each other. Among these four kinds the righteous ***meditator*** must scrutinize carefully by knowledge whether three kinds of objects, i.e., number 1 to 3, except number  4,  are  same  or  not.  Furthermore,  in  one  life,  consciousness  of  ***paṭisandhi***, consciousness of life-continuum, consciousness of death have not only the same objects but also the same numbers of mind and mental concomitants. He has to scrutinize carefully over and over. After seeing on both how present ***paṭisandhi*** five aggregates arise, due to past causal ***dhammas*** and how many mental ***dhammas*** arise at ***paṭisandhi*** moment the practicing ***meditator***  can  discern  life-continuum  mind-clear-element  systematically.  Unless  he  can discern it systematically, ***paṭisandhi*** mental ***dhammas*** must be discerned over and over again. Then mental ***dhammas*** of the first life-continuum which arise continuously after ***paṭisandhi*** must  be  kept  in  mind.  Those  are  successive  occurring  consciousness  so  as  not  to  cease continuity of mind during life when consciousness of cognitive processes do not arise. If the righteous  ***meditator***  understand  this,  he  must  continue  to  discern  life-continuum  mental ***dhammas*** which occur interval of cognitive processes continuously. It will be successful. 

**PAGE-239** 
PAGE29

**6.10.B Three roots-two roots-joyful-neutrality** 

1. If ***paṭisandhi*** is associated with three roots (***tihetuka***), the life-continuum and death are also associated with three roots. 
1. If ***paṭisandhi*** is associated with two roots (***dvihetuka***), the life-continuum and death are also associated with two roots. 
1. If ***paṭisandhi*** is associated with joyful feeling, the life-continuum and death are also associated with joyful feeling. 
1. If ***paṭisandhi*** is associated with neutrality feeling, the life-continuum and death are also associated with neutrality feeling. 

Therefore  if  ***paṭisandhi***  is  associated  with  three  roots  and  joyful  feeling,  life- continuum and death  are also associated with three roots and joyful  feeling,  resulting in consisting with (34) mental ***dhammas*** in each mind moment. If ***paṭisandhi*** is associated with three roots and neutrality feeling, life-continuum and death are also associated with three roots and neutrality feeling, resulting in consisting with (33) mental ***dhammas*** in each mind moment. 

Because  the  life-continuum  of  righteous  person  with  joyful  ***paṭisandhi***  always associates with joyful feeling, consciousness of cognitive processes usually associate with joyful feeling throughout life whatever object might be encountered. If a righteous person has got  ***paṭisandhi***  with  neutrality  feeling,  the  life-continuum  also  associates  with  neutrality feeling, resulting in frequent arising of neutrality feeling on various objects in the continuum of that person. The person with neutrality feeling has got appearance of calmness while the person with joyful feeling, the appearance of smiling and friendliness. It is resulted from efficiency of life-continuum which is the most frequent occurring mind moments throughout life.  In  this  case  it  should  be  recognized  the  fact  this  is  saying  with  referring  to  only investigating-impulsions-registering  which  have  variation  in  joyful  and  neutrality  feeling within consciousness of cognitive process especially. 

11. **Ways of keeping in mind causes and results** 

As  mentioned  above  when  the  righteous  ***meditator***  knows  and  sees  present  life consequence ***dhammas***, ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness etc., and previous life causal ***dhammas***, ignorance  craving-clinging-formations-action  penetratively,  he  can  begin  the  function  of Knowledge of Discerning Cause and Condition. During keeping in mind in that way\_\_\_ 

1. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind through seeing nature of causal relationship in order, i.e., from the ignorance as beginning until ageing-death as end (***anuloma***); 
1. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind through seeing nature of causal relationship in reverse order, i.e., from ageing-death as beginning until ignorance as end (***paṭiloma***); 

**PAGE-240** 

3. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind through seeing nature of causal relationship  in  reverse  order,  i.e.,  the  middle  factors,  four  kinds  of  nourishment (***āhāra***) as beginning until ignorance as end (***paṭiloma***); 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE32

4. Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** can be kept in mind through seeing nature of causal relationship in order, i.e., the middle factors, feeling or craving as beginning until ageing-death as end (***anuloma***); 
4. Causal  and  resultant  ***dhammas***  can  be  kept  in  mind  by  means  of  action  round- consequence round after adding defilement round into action round, as the preaching found in the ***Pāli*** Text of ***Paṭisambhidā Magga*** **pp. 50, 51**. 
6. **Way of keeping in mind by means of *sādhāraņa asādhāraņa*** 

Another  practicing  ***meditator***  discerns  two  kinds  of  causal  ***dhammas***  of  mental ***dhammas*** by means of having dealings with (***sādhāraņa***) and not having dealings with  (***asādhāraņa***).  Four  kinds  of  causal  ***dhammas***  of  corporeal  ***dhammas***  are discerned  by  means  of  ***kamma-citta-utu-āhāra***  (action  –  mind-temperature- nutriment). 

It will be explicit in detail\_\_\_\_ 

There are two kinds of causal ***dhammas*** of mental ***dhammas***, viz,  

1. Causal ***dhammas*** with having dealings with 
1. Causal ***dhammas*** without having dealings with. 

In those kinds, (6) doors, (6) object are causal ***dhammas*** which have dealings with all mental  ***dhammas***  (in  five-groups-existence).  Because  all  varieties  of  mental  ***dhammas*** without  remain,  such  as,  wholesome  ***dhamma***,  unwholesome  ***dhamma***,  consequence ***dhamma***, mere functioning ***dhamma***, those ***dhammas*** which arise together with mentally agreeable feeling, those ***dhammas*** which arise together with mentally disagreeable feeling, those ***dhammas*** which arise together with bodily agreeable feeling, those ***dhammas*** which arise together with bodily disagreeable feeling, those ***dhammas*** which arise together with neutrality feeling etc., are produced by causal ***dhammas*** called those doors-objects, the latter are the causal ***dhammas*** which have dealings with all mental ***dhammas***. 

The  action  (***kamma***)  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***  which  has  dealings  with  both  all consequence mental ***dhammas*** and all corporealities produced by ***kamma***. It is the causal ***dhamma*** which has not dealings with other wholesome ***dhammas***, unwholesome ***dhammas***, mere  functioning ***dhammas***,  corporealities produced by  mind,  corporealities produced by temperature, corporealities produced by nutriment. 

Consciousness is the causal ***dhamma*** which has dealings with both associating mental concomitants ***dhammas*** and corporealities produced by mind. It is the causal ***dhamma*** which has not dealings with either mental concomitants ***dhammas*** which do not arise together with it within same mind moment or corporealities produced by ***kamma***, corporealities produced by temperature, corporealities produced by nutriment. 

**PAGE-241** 

***Utu***  (temperature)\_\_\_  The  compatible  temperature  (***sabhāga  utu***)  is  the  causal  ***dhamma*** which  has  dealings  with  all  compatible  corporealities  produced  by  temperature.  It  is  the causal  ***dhamma***  which  has  not  dealings  with  imcompatible  (***visadhāga***)  corporealities produced  by  temperature,  corporealities  produced  by  ***kamma***,  corporealities  produced  by mind, corporealities produced by nutriment.  

***Āhāra***  (nutriment)\_\_\_  ***āhārajaoja***  (nutriment  produced  by  nutriment)  (***kammajaojā***, ***cittajaojā,  utujaojā***)  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***  which  has  dealings  with  all  corporealities produced by nutriment. It is the causal ***dhamma*** which has not dealings with corporealities 
PAGE31

produced  by  ***kamma***,  corporealities  produced  by  mind,  corporealities  produced  by temperature. ***(Vs-2-234, Mahāṭī-2-374, 375) Pāli Quotation (Vs-2-234, 235)*** 

1. ***kamma*** (action)\_\_\_ 

***kusalākusalacetanā  vipākānam  khand  hānam,  kaṭattā  ca  rūpānam kammapaccayena paccayo. (Abhi-8-154)*** 

- Wholesome volition, unwholesome volition benefit for arising of both consequence 

mental aggregates and corporealities produced by ***kamma*** by means of efficiency of relation of action. ***(Abhi-8-154)*** 

According to above preaching found in ***Paṭṭhāna***, the term, ***kamma***, must be inferred as wholesome volition, unwholesome volition. Those wholesome volition and unwholesome volition are only past ***dhammas***. The volition called ***kamma*** which had been cultivated in past  period  can  produce  ***kammasamuṭṭhāna  rūpa***  (corporealities  produced  by  ***kamma***). ***(Mahāṭī-2-375)*** 

2. ***Citta*** (mind)\_\_\_ 

***hetūhetusampayuttakānam  dhammānam,  tam  samuṭṭhānānañca  rūpānam hetupaccayena paccayo. (Abhi-8-1)*** 

Six  kinds  of  roots  (***hetu***)  ***dhammas***  benefit  for  arising  of  both  associating consciousness and mental concomitants and corporealities produced by those consciousness and mental concomitants by means of efficiency of relation of root. (***Abhi-8-1***) 

Due  to  presence  of  the  Buddha's  preaching  in  this  way,  the  term,  ***citta***,  must  be inferred as both kinds of consciousness and mental concomitants which have got efficiency to produce ***cittaja  rūpa***, but  not  consciousness  only.  Those ***dhammas***  of consciousness  and mental concomitants have got great efficiency and powerful at arising phase only, due to accepting the benefiting efficiency of relation of contiguity etc., of preceding mind. Therefore the consciousness (in the next method) consciousness and mental concomitants can produce ***cittasamuṭṭhāna rūpa*** at the arising phase only. ***(Mahāaṭī-2-3785)*** 

3. ***Utu* (temperature)   4. *Āhāra* (nutriment)** 

***bāhiram utum, āhārañca paccayam labhitvā attano ṭhitikkhaņe utuāhārā rūpam janentīti attho. (Mahāṭī-2-375)*** 

Corporeal ***dhamma*** is powerful at the static phase, due to accepting the benefiting efficiency  of  relation  of post-compatibility  etc.  Due  to presence  of  strength  of  corporeal ***dhamma*** at the static phase, temperatures produced by four origins (***catu samuṭṭhānika utu***) called ***kammaja utu, cittaja utu, utuja utu, āhāraja utu***, which accept the supporting factor of  external  temperature,  give  rise  to  occur  corporealities  produced  by  temperature (***utusamuṭṭhānarūpa***). If the supporting factor of external nutriment called ***kabaļīkārāhāra*** is available, each nutriment produced by four origins (***catu samuṭṭhānika ojā***) give rise to occur new corporeal units at the static phase. 

**PAGE-242** 

These causal ***dhammas***, viz, 

1. ***yonisomanasikāra*** = wise attention, 
1. ***saddhammasavana*** = listening ***dhammas*** preached by righteous persons, 
1. ***sappurisūpanissaya*** = taking refuge to virtuous persons, 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE34

4. ***paṭirūpadesavāsa*** = dwelling at suitable place where Noble Ones dwell, 

are  causal  ***dhammas***  which  have  dealings  with  wholesome  ***dhamma***  only.  Those causal  ***dhammas***,  unwise  attention  (***ayonisomanasikāra***)  etc.,  in  turn,  are  specific  causal ***dhamma*** of arising of unwholesome ***dhammas***. It means these are causal ***dhammas*** which have not dealings with wholesome ***dhammas***. 

Ignorance-craving-clinging-formation  action  etc., are  causal ***dhammas*** which  have not dealing with consequence ***dhammas***. 

The life-continuum is the causal ***dhamma*** which has not dealings with five-doors- adverting and mind-door adverting in five-doors cognitive process and mind-door-cognitive process respectively. 

The  investigating  (***santiraņa***)  is  the  causal  ***dhamma***  which  has  not  dealings  with determining (***vuṭṭhāpana***). 

Sensual mere functioning (***kāma kiriyā***) is the causal ***dhamma*** which has not dealings with  sensual  mere  functioning  and  subline  mere  functioning  (***mahaggata  kiriyā***) appropriately. 

The Fruit-Knowledge of Arahant is causal ***dhamma*** of all kinds of mere functioning (***kiriyā***), excluding adverting (***āvajjana***). (***Vs-2-234, Mahāṭī-2-375***) 

12. **The fifth method of dependent-origination** 

In this paper it will be presented previously on the way of keeping in mind which is applied basing on these two ways, i.e., 

1. way of keeping in mind by means of action round-consequence round, and 
1. way of keeping in mind by means of ***sādhāraņa asādhāraņa***. 

Only when one can keep in mind those two kinds, can he discern and ponder ways of discerning found in detailed account of knowledge of Arising and Passing Away. The fifth method  of  dependent-origination,  therefore,  means  the  way  of  keeping  in  mind  which concerns with those two ways. The reason why this way of keeping in mind is presented previously is that \_\_\_\_\_ firstly it can be suggested that this way of keeping in mind can provide easily understood for those practising persons with weakness in basic Knowledge of ***Abhidhamma***; second, it might be very useful in the way of discerning on the Knowledge of Arising and Passing Away in detail, resulting in no need to learn that way of discerning again for those persons with weakness in basic knowledge of ***Abhidhamma***. Most of practising ***meditators*** has been observed and found that they had got easy understanding on the first method of dependent-origination after mastery in this method. 

**PAGE-243** 

**6.12.A Essential facts to be recognized previously** 

Causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind after seeing the nature of link of causes and results through dividing five aggregates of each mind moment from ***paṭsandhi*** as beginning. During dividing five aggregates, in each mind moment\_\_\_\_\_ 

1. depended base-corporealities and object corporealities, which are existing in (6) doors, are corporeal aggregates; 
1. the feeling, mental concomitant of mental ***dhammas***, is feeling aggregate, 
1. the perception, mental concomitant of mental ***dhammas***, is perception aggregate, 
1. (a) the volition, mental concomitant of mental ***dhammas***, is formation aggregate, (First method) 

(b)  Remaining  mental  concomitants,  excluding  feeling,  perception,  consciousness  of mental ***dhammas*** are formation aggregate. (Second method) 
PAGE33

5. the consciousness, mental concomitant of mental ***dhammas***, is consciousness aggregate, 

***sańkhārakkhandhā*  (formation  aggregate)*\_\_\_\_\_***  In  formation  aggregate,  the  preaching methodology by which volition is referred as formation aggregate is called ***padhānanaya*** (significant method). That preaching methodology can be found in ***Upādānaparipavattana Sutta*** etc. 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-49)*** 

Six kinds of volitions, viz., ***rūpa sañcetanā*** (volition towards sight), ***saddasañcetanā*** (volition  towards  sound),  ***gandhasañcetanā***  (volition  towards  smell),  (volition  towards flavour), ***dhamma sañcetanā*** (volition towards ***dhamma*** object) are formations aggregate. Due to arising of contact, formations arise; due to cessation of contact, formations cease. 

In  this  ***Sutta***  the  volition  is  preached  as  formation  aggregate  through  significant preaching methodology, due to significance of volition to produce results. This is the first method and known as ***suttantanaya***. 

In  the  aspect  of  preaching  methodology  of  ***Abhidhamma***,  all  remaining  mental ***dhammas***, excluding feeling, perception, consciousness, within each mind moment are called formation aggregate. Present causal ***dhammas*** which have not dealings with that formation aggregate  are  the  proximate  causes  called  remaining  three  mental  aggregates,  feeling aggregate,  perception  aggregate,  consciousness  aggregate  (***sesakhandhattaya  padaṭṭhānā***) (***Vs-2-92***) 

**PAGE-244** 

In  accordance  with  this  preaching,  way  of  keeping  in  mind  causal  and  resultant ***dhammas*** will be presented as two ways, 

1. volition is inferred as formation aggregate (First method) 
1. remaining mental concomitants, excluding feeling, perception are inferred as formation aggregate (Second method). 

It is the way of preaching with the intention so as not to remain all ultimate elements within each mind moment. 

In the first method the contact is causal ***dhamma*** of that formation aggregate. (***Sam-2-***

***49***). Then there is causal ***dhamma*** of that contact. Because the contact is also a conditioned thing, contact is also worth having causal ***dhamma***. Furthermore there is a question whether or not remaining mental concomitants, excluding feeling, perception, contact, volition, are worth having causal ***dhammas*** because those are also conditioned ***dhammas***. The second method is, therefore, shown in order to solve these problems etc. 

**6.12.B Contact\_\_\_\_\_ mind matter** 

***Pāli Quotation (Sam-2-49)*** 

In various ***Sutta***, such as above ***Upādānaparipavattana Sutta*** etc., it is preached how feeling aggregate, perception aggregate, formation aggregate arise, due to contact. Then the Buddha  preached  continuously  how  consciousness  aggregate  arises,  due  to  mental concomitants, depended base corporealities and object corporeality. 

During preaching  in  this  way because  no  consciousness  can  arise  without  mental concomitants and vice versa the contact, which is preached as causal ***dhamma*** of feeling, perception, formation, has no efficiency to arise pure itself. However it is significant causal ***dhamma*** during benefiting for arising of those feeling, perception, formation. Unless the 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE36

contact can  join together object with consciousness mental ***dhammas*** have no opportunity to arise really. The contact is significant factor for the function of knowing the object by mental ***dhammas*** led by consciousness. It can,  therefore, be said as obvious causal ***dhamma***. 

Again  there  is  a  question  whether  contact  benefits  only  those  ***dhammas***,  feeling, perception, formations, but not consciousness. It can be answered it benefits consciousness, too.  It  is  because  the  contact  is  also  included  in  mental  concomitant  which  are  causal ***dhammas***  of  consciousness  in  a  way  of  preaching  that  ***"nāmarūpasamudayā  viññāņa samudayo*** = due to arising of mind-matter, consciousness arises. 

**PAGE-245** 

Furthermore\_\_\_\_\_ there is also a question that during arising of consciousness, due to contact and associating mental concomitants, in other words, due to mind-matter, whether pure consciousness arises or not. Only the consciousness can not arise. It can arise in the presence  of  association  of  mental  concomitants  called  feeling  aggregate,  perception aggregate, formation aggregate. Thus the righteous person should like to understand the fact mental concomitants can benefit for arising of not only consciousness aggregate but also each other. The Exalted One, therefore, preached in ***Paṭṭhāna*** as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

***Pāli Quotation (Paṭṭhāna-1-5,8,9)*** 

- Four mental aggregates benefit each other by means of efficiency of relations of 

compatibility, mutuality, dependence, presence, non-disappearance. (***Paṭṭhāna-1,58,9)*** 

In ***Mahānidāna Sutta*** the Exalted One preached as follows:\_\_\_\_\_ 

***nāmarūpapaccayā  viññāņam,  viññāņapaccayā  nāmarūpam,  nāmarūpapaccayā  phasso. (Dī-2-48)*** 

- Due to mind-matter, consciousness arises; due to consciousness, mind-matter arise; 

due to mind-matter, contact arises. (***Dī-2-48***) 

***Pāli Quotation (Mūlaṭī-2-135)*** 

In that ***Mahānidāna Sutta***, as corporeal bases, eye-bases etc., are done within the list of corpoeal ***dhammas***, similarly the sixth base, mind base, is also done within the list of mind (***nāma***),  as  showing  all  causal ***dhammas***,  without  remain,  of  contact,  similarly \_\_\_\_  the Supreme Buddha preached that "***nāmarūpapaccayā phasso*** = due to mind-matter, the contact arises", so as to preach thoroughly on causal ***dhamma*** called mind (***nāmsa***). 

Similarly\_\_\_\_\_ in the second session of (***vāra***), ***sampayutta catukka, abhidhamma- bhājanīyanaya***, it is preached that ***nāmapaccayā phasso (Abhi-2-147)*** = due to mind, contact arises"  in  order  to  confiscate  that  preaching  of  ***Mahānidāna  Sutta***  through  showing significant  nature  that  has  been   shown  in  that  ***Mahānidāna  Sutta,***  after  making  to  be inclusive the sixth base, mind-base, within the mind (***nāma***). [It means the Supreme Buddha preached as ***nāmapaccayā phasso*** but not preached as ***salāyatana paccayā phasso.***] ***(Mūlaṭī- 2-135)*** 

**PAGE-246** 

**6.12.C *ekacittakkhaņika* (one mind moment)** 

-***nānācittakkhaņika* (various mind moments)** 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-191)*** 

In the preaching of both ***Suttanta*** and ***Suttantabhājanīya naya, Abhidhamma***, the term, formations (***sańkhārā***) is preached as pleural form through preachings in a way that 
PAGE35

"***avijjāpacayā sańkhārā*** = due to ignorance, formations arise apparently" etc. (***Sam-1-243, Abhi-2-142***) In the preaching of ***abhidhammabhājanīya***, the term formation (***sańkhāro***), is preached as singular form through preaching in a way that "***avijjāpaccayā sańkhāro*** = due to ignorance,  formation  arises".  The  reason  why  those kinds  of preachings  are  varied  is  as follows: \_\_\_\_\_ 

In the preaching of ***abhidhammabhājanīya naya***, the term, formation (***sańkhāro***), is preached  as  singular  form,  due  to presence  of  single  mind  moment  of  formation.  In  the preaching  of  that  ***Suttantabhājanīya  naya***,  on  the  other  hand,  principle  of  dependent- origination is preached discriminately with referring to various volitions occurring in various mind moments. In the preaching of this ***Abhidhammabhājanīya naya***, principle of dependent origination is preached discriminately with referring to the volition occurring in one mind moment. Then there is no numerous volitions within one mind moment really. (It should be understood similarly the fact there is no numerous contacts within one mind moment, etc.) Therefore  the  term,  formation  (***sańkhāro***)  is  preached  as  singular  form  only  but  not formations (***sańkhārā***), as pleural form. (***Abhi-A-2-191***) 

Due  to  presence  of  both  kinds  of  preaching  that  "***nāmarūpa  samudayā  viññāņa samudayo*** = due to arising of mind-matter, consciousness arises", (***Sam-2-49***) and "***viññāņa paccayā nāmarūpam*** = due to arising of consciousness, mind-matter arise", (***Dī-2-48, Abhi- 2-142,143***), mind-matter and consciousness benefit each other reciprocally. Those ***dhammas***, feeling, perception, contact, volition, etc., are also included in those mental ***dhammas***. 

It is also preached that "***nāmapaccayā phasso*** = Due to mind-base called sixth base, contact arises". (***Abhi-2-147***) 

***Pāli Quotation (Abhi-A-2-193)*** 

=Not only mental ***dhamma*** called mind-base but mental aggregates called feeling, perception, formation also are causal ***dhammas*** of arising of contact (***phassa***). (***Abhi-A-2- 193***) 

It should, therefore, be recognized 

1. four mental aggregates benefit each other mutually; 

**PAGE-247** 

2. contact  benefits  for  arising  of  both  associating  mental  ***dhammas***  within  same  mind moment and mental aggregates existing in succeeding mind moments; 
2. the contact has no efficiency to arise itself only but it has efficiency to arise only when associating mental ***dhammas*** are united,  
2. due to presence of a preaching that "***tiņņan sangati phasso*** = due to coincidence of three kinds,  base,  object  and  consciousness,  the  contact  arises",  (***M-1-158,326,  Sam-1-300, Sam-2-216, Abhi-4-48***), consciousness is significant factor for arising of contact; 
2. among those mental ***dhammas*** existing within one mind moment, if a mental ***dhamma***, lies at the site of resultant ***dhamma***, remaining mental ***dhammas*** lie at the side of causal ***dhamma*** and vice versa. 

**6.12.D Past causal *dhammas*, present causal *dhammas*** 

1. Those  ***dhammas***  called  ignorance-craving-clinging-formations-action  are  causal ***dhammas*** of both consequence mental ***dhammas*** which are fee from cognitive processes called ***paṭsandhi-bhavanga-cuti***, consequence mental ***dhammas*** which are consciousness of  cognitive  processes  called  fivefold  consciousness-receiving-investigating-registering and corporealities produced by ***kamma***. 

(It should be recognized similarly on three periods, past, future, present.) 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE38

2. The consciousness is causal ***dhamma*** of ***cittajarūpa*** (all consciousness except fivefold consciousness); 
2. the temperature is causal ***dhamma*** of ***utujarūpa***; 
2. the nutriment is causal ***dhamma*** of ***āhārajarūpa***; 
2. causal ***dhammas***, base, object, contact etc, are causal ***dhammas*** of four mental aggregates respectively. 

**7. Way of keeping in mind cause & result (section of Knowledge of Cause & Condition)** 

**7.1. *Paṭisandhi* five aggregates** 

During beginning of embryo at the moment of conception called ***paṭisandhi***, 

1. Three kinds of corporeal units called base-decad, body-decad, sex-decad, (30) kinds of corporealities are called corporeal aggregate. 
1. Among (34) kinds of ***paṭisandhi*** mental ***dhammas***, the feeling is called feeling aggregate. 
1. Among (34) kinds of ***paṭisandhi*** mental ***dhammas***, the perception is called perception aggregate. 
1. Among  (34)  kinds  of  ***paṭisandhi***  mental  ***dhammas***,  the  volition  is  called  formation aggregate. (first method) 

**PAGE-248** 

Among (34) kinds of ***paṭisandhi*** mental ***dhammas***, remaining (31) kinds of mental concomitants,  except  feeling-perception-consciousness,  are  called  formation  aggregate. (second method) 

5. Among  (34)  kinds  of  ***paṭisandhi***  mental  ***dhammas***,  the  consciousness  is  called consciousness aggregate. 

These five  aggregates are referred to only  mankind with three roots who has  got ***paṭisandhi*** associating with joyful feeling. If that person with three roots has got ***paṭisandhi*** associating with neutrality feeling, there are (33) mental ***dhammas*** at ***paṭisandhi***, due to lack of pleasurable interest (***pīti***). If  one has got ***paṭisandhi*** associating with joyful feeling and two  roots,  there  are  (33)  mental  ***dhammas***;  if  one  has  got  ***paṭisandhi***  associating   with neutrality feeling and two roots, there are (32) mental ***dhammas*** respectively. 

Only arising phase of ***paṭisandhi*** consciousness consists of (3) kinds  of corporeal units, (30) kinds of corporealities. At the beginning of static phase (***ṭhiti kāla***) of ***paṭisandhi*** corporealities  produced  by  ***kamma***  called  ***kammajarūpa***  the  fire-elements  within  those corporeal units produce new corporeal units with nutriment as  eighth  factor called ***utuja ojaṭṭhamaka  kalāpa***  again.  Every  fire-element  called  temperature  (***utu***)  within  every corporeal unit which reaches to static phase, generally, can produce new corporeal unit with nutriment as eighth factor. 

Corporeal units produced by ***kamma*** always arise at every three-time-phases called ***uppāda-ṭhiti-bhanga*** of each mind moment throughout life. Because every corporeal unit produced by ***kamma*** consist of the fire-element, that fire-element produces new corporal unit whenever it reaches into the static phase called ***uppāda kāla*** again and again. 

Furthermore every pure octad with the nutriment as eighth factor consists of the fire- element. That fire-element also produces new corporeal unit whenever it reaches to the static phase. 

Every consciousness, excluding  fivefold consciousness, from the beginning of the first life-continuum until death, can produce new corporeal unit with the nutriment as eighth factor at every static phase. Every mind-moment can produce numerous corporeal units with 
PAGE37

the nutriment as eighth factor. That every pure octad produced by mind also consists of the fire-element which can produce new corporeal unit with the nutriment as eighth factor. 

Corporealities produced by nutriment begin to arise at the beginning of spreading of mother’s  ingested  food  throughout  body  of  foetus.  Therefore  corpoealities  produced  by temperature begin to arise at the static phase of ***paṭisandhi***. Corporealities produced by mind begin to arise from the first life-continuum. Coprporealities produced by nutriment beginning to arise at the beginning of spreading of mother’s ingested food throughout body of foetus. Therefore  it  is  essential  to be  careful  during  discening  corporeal  aggregate.  By  the  time causes & results are kept in mind in recent period, all kinds of corporealities produced by four origins called ***kammaja rūpa, cittaja rūpa, utuja rūpa,āahāraja rūpa*** arise completely. 

**PAGE-249** 

Previously  both  obvious  occurrence  of  two  kinds  of  action  round,  viz,  formation action, due to presence of defilement round, viz, ignorance-craving-clinging, and the nature of arising of ***paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate which is inclusive in consequence round, due to presence of those action round, in other words, due to presence of efficiency of ***kamma***  (action)  must  be  discerned  by  insight.  When  the  phenomenon  of  arising  of  resultant ***dhammas,  paṭisandhi***  corporealities  produced  by  ***kamma***,  basing  on  causal  ***dhammas***, formation-action which were surrounded by ignorance-craving-clinging, is known and seen by the insight causal and resultant ***dhammas*** must be kept in mind as follows. \_\_\_\_\_ 

1. ***paṭisandhi* corporeal aggregate*** 
1. Due to arising of ignorance (=20), ***paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate arises. Ignorance (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of craving (=20), ***paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate arises. Craving (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of clinging (=20), ***paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate arises. Clinging (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of formations (=34), ***paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate arises. Formations  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paṭisandhi***  corporeal  aggregate  is  resultant ***dhamma***. 
1. Due to arising of efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34), ***paṭisandhi*** corporeal aggregate arises. Efficiency  of  ***kamma***  (=34)  is  causal  ***dhamma;  paṭisandhi***  corporeal  aggregate  is 

resultant ***dhamma***. 

[**Notes:**\_\_\_\_\_  In  those  defilement  rounds,  ignorance-craving-clinging,  the  numbers,  (20), refer  group  of  mental  ***dhammas***,  the  first  unprepared  consciousness  rooted  in  greed, associating with mentally agreeable feeling and wrong view (***somanassa sahagata diṭṭhigata sampayutta  asańkhārika  pathama  lobhamūla  citta***)  It  can  vary  with  (22/19/21)  mental ***dhammas*** appropriately. One must discern those numbers of mental ***dhammas*** which had been cultivated in previous life of himself. 

Then in those action rounds, formation-action, the numbers, (34), refer (34) kinds of mental ***dhammas*** of faith-wisdom group, action round, namely, the first unprepared great wholesome  consciousness  associating  with  mentally  agreeable  feeling  and  knowledge (***samanassa-sahagata  ñāņasampayutta  asańkārika  pathama  mahākusala  citta***).  If  the righteous ***meditator*** had developed the action which was associated with neutrality feeling in previous lives, the numbers of mental ***dhammas*** were (33) because of lack of pleasusrable interest  called  ***pīti***.  In  this  case,  only  the  person  with  three  roots  (***tihetuka  puggala***)  is presented as example because most ***meditators*** who can keep in mind corporeality-mentality- cause-result in this way are generally those persons with three roots. If a such ***meditator*** is the 

Translated by - ***Aññatara Bhikkhu*** \*  PAGE39

person  with  two  roots,  numbers  of  mental  ***dhammas***  of  formation-action  can  be  (33/32) respectively. 

**PAGE-250** 

Only when both sides of cause and result is broken down each compactness, can the penetrative  knowledge  reach  to  the  ultimate  nature.  Then  only  when  the  penetrative knowledge reaches to the ultimate nature, causal relationship between causal and resultant ultimate nature can be discerned systematically. Causal relationship can be discerned between neither concepts nor concept and ultimate nature. 

**Clinging  (*upādāna*)**  \_\_\_\_\_  Only  sensual  clinging  is  presented  as  example  because  most ***meditators*** experienced with sensual clinging generally. However the righteous ***meditator*** must  keep  in  mind  relationship  between  any  kind  of  four  clinging  which  had  been experienced  during  cultivating  formation  action  in previous  lives  and  resultant  aggregate systematically. 

2. ***paṭisandhi* feeling aggregate** 

Causes  and  results  must  be  kept  in  mind  by  seeing  phenomenon  of  arising  of ***paṭisandhi***  feeling  aggregate  due  to presence  of both past  causal ***dhammas***  cultivated  in previous life and present causal ***dhammas***, base-object-contact etc. 

**Five kinds of past causal *dhammas*** 

1. Due to arising of ignorance (=20), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Ignorance (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

2. Due to arising of craving (=20), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Craving (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

3. Due to arising of clinging (=20), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Clinging (=20) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

4. Due to arising of formation (=34), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Formation (=34) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

5. Due to arising of efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. Efficiency of ***kamma*** (=34) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

**Three kinds of present causal dhammas** 

6. Due to arising of base (=depended base corporeality, 30), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Base (=depended base corporeality, 30) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

7. Due to arising of object (=***kamma*** object), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. 

Object (=***kamma*** object) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 

8. Due to arising of contact (= 34 – feeling = 33), ***paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate arises. Contact (= 34 – feeling = 33) is causal ***dhamma; paṭisandhi*** feeling aggregate is resultant ***dhamma***. 
PAGE39
